Demystifying Group Relative Policy Optimization: Its Policy
Gradient is a U-Statistic
Hongyi Zhou1,∗

Kai Ye2,∗

Erhan Xu2

arXiv:2603.01162v3 [cs.LG] 22 Mar 2026

Shijin Gong5,†

Jin Zhu3

Ying Yang4

Chengchun Shi2,†

Abstract
Group relative policy optimization (GRPO), a core methodological component of DeepSeekMath and DeepSeek-R1, has emerged as a cornerstone for scaling reasoning capabilities of large
language models. Despite its widespread adoption and the proliferation of follow-up works, the
theoretical properties of GRPO remain less studied. This paper provides a unified framework to
understand GRPO through the lens of classical U-statistics. We demonstrate that the GRPO
policy gradient is inherently a U-statistic, allowing us to characterize its mean squared error
(MSE), derive the finite-sample error bound and asymptotic distribution of the suboptimality
gap for its learned policy. Our findings reveal that GRPO is asymptotically equivalent to an oracle policy gradient algorithm – one with access to a value function that quantifies the goodness of
its learning policy at each training iteration – and achieves asymptotically optimal performance
within a broad class of policy gradient algorithms. Furthermore, we establish a universal scaling
law that offers principled guidance for selecting the optimal group size. Empirical experiments
further validate our theoretical findings, demonstrating that the optimal group size is universal,
and verify the oracle property of GRPO.

1

Introduction

Since the birth of ChatGPT in 2022, large language models (LLMs) have been increasingly integrated into our work and everyday life. These models are evolving at an extremely fast pace
and can now perform a broad range of tasks at or beyond human level, ushering in an era of rapid
technological advancement across scientific, industrial, and societal domains. One of the underlying
technologies that enhance the capabilities of these LLMs is reasoning. The idea is straightforward:
because LLMs generate human language, they can be guided to perform multi-step reasoning in a
manner similar to humans. Initially, this is often achieved through some simple magical prompts
[Wei et al., 2022] – for example, “Let us think step by step” – which encourage the model to decompose complex questions into intermediate reasoning steps and produce more accurate solutions;
see Figure 1 for an illustration.
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.
1
Department of Mathematics, Tsinghua University; Email: zhou-hy21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn.
2
Department of Statistics, London School of Economics and Political Science; Emails: K.Ye1@lse.ac.uk,
E.Xu2@lse.ac.uk, c.shi7@lse.ac.uk.
3
School of Mathematics, University of Birmingham; Email: j.zhu.7@bham.ac.uk.
4
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Tsinghua University; Email: yangying@tsinghua.edu.cn.
5
School of Management, University of Science and Technology of China; Email: shijin49@mail.ustc.edu.cn.
†

1

Figure 1: An illustration of LLM reasoning. The example shows a prompt and the corresponding
model output, consisting of a reasoning trace and a final solution.
Early progress in LLM reasoning was driven largely by inference-time techniques that avoid
retraining the language model, focusing on eliciting or searching for more effective intermediate
reasoning steps. In parallel, Ouyang et al. [2022] established a scalable reinforcement learning with
human feedback (RLHF) pipeline for retraining – more precisely, post-training – LLMs to align
their outputs with human values. Its main idea is to (i) collect multiple responses for each prompt
and obtain human preference over these responses; (ii) learn a reward model from the resulting
preference data [Christiano et al., 2017]; and (iii) apply reinforcement learning (RL), specifically
the proximal policy optimization algorithm [PPO, Schulman et al., 2017] to fine-tune the LLM
parameters so as to maximize the cumulative estimated reward. This work provided a practical
demonstration that RL, when combined with human preference feedback, can reliably steer LLM
behavior at scale.
The RLHF pipeline is applicable to LLM reasoning. However, it introduces two challenges.
First, reasoning tasks often produce long intermediate trajectories, making human supervision for
labeling responses time-consuming. This challenge can be addressed by reinforcement learning with
verifiable rewards [RLVR, Lambert et al., 2025], which similarly employs RL for post-training but
replaces the reward function learned from subjective human preference with objective verifiers in
applications such as mathematics problems, where solutions are unique, or programming tasks,
where the generated code can be executed to verify its correctness. The second challenge is more
technical: PPO requires to learn a critic network that quantifies the quality of the model at each
step to reduce the variance of the stochastic gradient. Nonetheless, estimating and storing such a
network in reasoning tasks is computationally expensive.
Group relative policy optimization [GRPO, Shao et al., 2024] represents a major milestone for
RL algorithms tailored to LLM reasoning. It provides a highly effective solution to the second
challenge by eliminating the critic network entirely and instead sampling multiple outputs for each
prompt, using their group average as a proxy for the critic; refer to Figure 2 for an overview of the
GRPO pipeline, and Section 3 for details. This approach leads to the development of DeepSeekR1, a prominent large reasoning model at the time, whose post-training requires only about 147K
H800 GPU-hours – an order of magnitude lower than many contemporary large reasoning models,
including OpenAI’s o1 series [Jaech et al., 2024].
The methodology was further formalized in a paper published in Nature [Guo et al., 2025],
marking the first peer-reviewed LLM article in the journal, and was subsequently deployed by
various open-source LLMs. These efforts established GRPO as a foundational RLVR algorithm for
LLM reasoning, with numerous follow-up methods built upon it shortly after its introduction (see
2

Figure 2: Overview of the GRPO pipeline. For each prompt, GRPO samples multiple reasoning
traces to generate outputs, which are then evaluated by a reward model to measure their quality.
These rewards are compared against the group mean and standardized to compute the advantage
function, which is used to update the policy model, subject to KL regularization with respect to a
reference model.
Section 2.2 for a review). Beyond LLM reasoning, GRPO has also been applied as a general-purpose
RL engine in other domains, including agent settings, where the goal extends beyond chatbots to
enabling the model to use external tools or perform more complex tasks [e.g., Qian et al., 2025,
Ding and Ye, 2026].
All of the aforementioned developments highlight the practical appeal of GRPO, but they also
reveal a theoretical gap, as formal analyses remain limited in the literature. In particular:
Q1. Why is GRPO so effective?
Q2. What is the rationale for using the group mean to approximate the critic network?
Q3. Can we provide finite-sample or asymptotic analyses regarding its convergence?
Q4. How many outputs shall we sample per prompt?
This paper addresses these questions by demystifying GRPO from a statistical perspective. Our
key observation is that GRPO is deeply connected to U-statistics [Hoeffding, 1948], a connection
that has not been explicitly recognized in prior works. Building on this observation, we conduct a
comprehensive analysis of GRPO, covering both finite-sample and asymptotic properties, examining
both the original algorithm and its variants, and analyzing both the policy gradient estimator
used to update model parameters at each iteration and the suboptimality gap, which measures the
difference between the learned policy and the optimal policy; see Figure 3 for a visualization of our
theoretical framework.
Our theoretical contributions are as follows:
1. We establish the first connection between GRPO and U-statistics by showing that the GRPO
policy gradient is inherently a U-statistic (Lemma 1). This addresses Q2 by providing a principled explanation for using the group mean to approximate the critic network through classical
U-statistics theory.

3

Figure 3: Roadmap of our theoretical results.
2. To address Q3, we provide finite-sample analyses that characterize the mean squared error
(MSE) of the GRPO policy gradient (Theorem 2 & Proposition 3) and derive error bounds
on its suboptimality gap (Lemma 6). We further establish parameter consistency and derive
the asymptotic distribution of the suboptimality gap without requiring parameter identifiability
(Theorem 8). This result is novel in two respects: (i) existing literature primarily focuses on
error bounds for the suboptimality gap, which characterize its order but are not as accurate
as its distribution; and (ii) classical asymptotic analyses rely on parameter identifiability, an
assumption clearly violated in overparameterized LLMs.
3. Our finite-sample and asymptotic analyses lead to two desirable properties of GRPO: (i) the
oracle property (Corollaries 4 & 9), whereby GRPO is asymptotically equivalent to an oracle
algorithm with access to the true critic network; and (ii) optimality (Corollaries 5 & 10), whereby
GRPO asymptotically minimizes both the MSE and the suboptimality gap among a broad class
of RL algorithms. These theoretical findings are further supported by empirical evidence (Figure
4), which addresses Q1 and explains GRPO’s effectiveness.
4. Finally, to address Q4, we derive a scaling law that delineates how GRPO’s performance depends
on the number of sampled outputs per group, and identifies the optimal group size that maximizes its performance (Theorem 7). Notably, this optimal choice depends only on the training
data and model architecture, and is independent of other factors such as the training budget or
number of iterations. This universality makes our scaling law particularly appealing, as it does
not require retuning when these factors change. Its universality is further validated empirically
(Table 2 & Figure 5).

2

Related works

Our work connects two modern areas in artificial intelligence – reinforcement learning (Section 2.1),
and its emerging application to LLM reasoning through RLVR (Section 2.2) – with the classical
theory of U-statistics (Section 2.3).

2.1

Reinforcement learning

The literature on RL is vast. Existing algorithms are broadly distinguished as planning or learning,
based on whether the data generating process is known [e.g., Sutton and Barto, 2018, Chapter 8].
4

Within learning, model-based approaches explicitly estimate the MDP model [e.g., Jiang, 2024],
while model-free methods do not. The latter can be further divided into value-based algorithms
that learn a value function to measure the goodness of a policy and derive the optimal policy by
maximizing this value, and policy-based algorithms that directly searches the optimal policy over a
restricted policy class. Over time, RL research has evolved across four phases, summarized below
in chronological order:
1. Classical RL: Early works studied non-deep-learning algorithms, in the form of tabular methods
that store estimates in lookup tables, or using classical ML models for function approximation.
Two foundational examples are tabular Q-learning [Watkins and Dayan, 1992] and fitted Qiteration [Ernst et al., 2005]. Among these algorithms, GRPO is closely related to policy-based
algorithms such as REINFORCE [Williams, 1992] and actor-critic [Konda and Tsitsiklis, 1999].
As demonstrated later, GRPO is in essence a policy-based algorithm adapted for LLM reasoning.
2. Deep RL: Spurred by the deep learning revolution of the 2010s, a line of advanced deep RL
algorithms emerged. This era was largely catalyzed by the success of the deep Q-network in
mastering video games [Mnih et al., 2015] and the development of AlphaGo for the game of Go
[Silver et al., 2016]. Since then, deep RL has become a cornerstone of modern AI research both
methodologically [e.g., Mnih et al., 2016, Van Hasselt et al., 2016, Dabney et al., 2018, Zhou et al.,
2020, Chen et al., 2021] and theoretically [e.g., Fan et al., 2020, Feng et al., 2023, Shen et al.,
2025, Sun et al., 2025]. Of particular relevance to GRPO are trust region policy optimization
[TRPO, Schulman et al., 2015] and its successor, PPO. The latter has been a prominent policybased algorithm widely applied across various domains, including robotics [Andrychowicz et al.,
2020] and LLM fine-tuning [Ouyang et al., 2022].
3. Offline RL: In high-stakes applications where safety concerns make online exploration prohibitive, it is more practical to employ offline RL that learns exclusively from static, historical
datasets [Levine et al., 2020]. The core principle of offline RL is to apply the pessimistic principle
[e.g., Jin et al., 2021, Rashidinejad et al., 2021] for conservative policy learning. While this principle traces back to the seminal works of Swaminathan and Joachims [2015b,a], the paradigm
saw a resurgence in the early 2020s [e.g., Kumar et al., 2019, Wu et al., 2019, Yu et al., 2020,
Xie et al., 2021, Uehara and Sun, 2022]. Parallel to offline policy learning, off-policy evaluation
seeks to evaluate the impact of adopting a target policy based on the historical data generated
by a different policy [e.g., Thomas et al., 2015, Jiang and Li, 2016, Thomas and Brunskill, 2016,
Liu et al., 2018, Xie et al., 2019, Kallus and Uehara, 2022]; see Uehara et al. [2022] for a recent
review.
4. RLHF: Following the seminal work by Ouyang et al. [2022], the field has seen an unprecedented
proliferation of literature dedicated to RLHF [Christiano et al., 2017], with the goal of aligning
the output of LLMs with human preferences through RL [e.g., Munos et al., 2023, Rafailov et al.,
2023, Wu et al., 2024, 2025b, Zeng et al., 2024]. Theoretically, existing works have explored both
the asymptotic distribution of the parameter estimates [Liu et al., 2024] and finite-sample error
bounds for the sub-optimality gap [e.g., Chowdhury et al., 2024, Zhong et al., 2024, Aminian
et al., 2025, Ye et al., 2025, Xu et al., 2025a] and regret [Zhang et al., 2025d]. Despite these
analyses, GRPO – a key driver of recent breakthroughs in LLM reasoning – remains largely
under-theorized.

5

Finally, RL is closely related to two branches of research in statistics, primarily motivated by
healthcare applications; see Chakraborty and Moodie [2013], Kosorok and Laber [2019], Tsiatis
et al. [2019], Li et al. [2023], Shi [2025], Ge et al. [2025], Gazi et al. [2026] for reviews. (i) Early
works develop RL algorithms to learn optimal dynamic treatment regimes (DTRs), which are
individualized strategies that tailor medical interventions to a patient’s unique characteristics and
evolving clinical state. Some representative algorithms include Q-learning [Qian and Murphy,
2011, Song et al., 2015], A-learning [Murphy, 2003, Robins, 2004, Shi et al., 2018] and policy-based
methods [Zhang et al., 2013, Zhao et al., 2015]. These studies focus on short-horizon settings, where
treatment decisions are made at a single stage or over a small, finite number of stages. (ii) More
recently, the literature has expanded to study MDPs under long-horizon settings [e.g., Ertefaie and
Strawderman, 2018, Luckett et al., 2020, Liao et al., 2022, Chen et al., 2024, Li et al., 2024a, Shi
et al., 2024a,b, Zhou et al., 2024, Ma et al., 2025, Jin et al., 2025, Li et al., 2025b, Zhong et al.,
2025] as well as RLHF [e.g., Lee et al., 2024, Liu et al., 2025b,a, Lu et al., 2025, Xiao et al., 2025b].

2.2

Reinforcement learning from verifiable rewards

RLVR, an LLM post-training strategy introduced by Lambert et al. [2025], directly optimizes LLMs
against verifiable outcomes. Unlike RLHF, which requires to learn a reward function from subjective
human preferences across multiple candidate responses, RLVR leverages objective feedback signals –
for example, by verifying whether a model’s answer matches a ground-truth mathematical solution
or by executing the model’s generated code in programming tasks. The original algorithm in
Lambert et al. [2025] relied on PPO for policy learning, which learns a separate critic model that
evaluates the quality of the learning policy.
GRPO, a major breakthrough in RLVR, drastically scales the reasoning capacities of existing
LLMs. Its key ingredient lies in completely eliminating the critic model, sampling multiple reasoning
traces, and using their average reward as a proxy for the critic (see Section 3 for details). This
approach, originally introduced in DeepSeekMath [Shao et al., 2024], was largely popularized by
DeepSeek-R1 [Guo et al., 2025] and later validated by a series of pioneering open-source reasoning
models like Qwen2.5 [Yang et al., 2025]. Together, these works have sparked a surge of followup RLVR algorithms [see, e.g., Zhang et al., 2025a, for a recent review], which can be broadly
categorized into three types:
1. The first line of works refined the GRPO policy gradient estimator by (i) modifying [Hao et al.,
2025, Xiao et al., 2025a, Zeng et al., 2025] or replacing [Li et al., 2024b, Ahmadian et al.,
2024, Hu et al., 2025] the baseline term (the empirical group mean in GRPO); (ii) revising the
importance sampling ratio used in GRPO [Zheng et al., 2025a, Pang and Jin, 2025] or removing
it altogether [Chu et al., 2025]; and (iii) applying different normalizations to the reward [Xiong
et al., 2025, Liu et al., 2025c, Xiao et al., 2025a]. In summary, these algorithms preserve the
critic-free GRPO framework while modifying how policy gradient estimators are computed or
normalized.
2. The second line of works considered different optimization objectives, including entropy-regularized
objectives that encourage exploration to prevent the model from entropy collapse [Zhang et al.,
2025b, Cheng et al., 2025, Chen et al., 2025], length- or difficulty-aware objectives that balance
correctness with concise reasoning [Zhang and Zuo, 2025, Dai et al., 2025a], risk-sensitive targets
[Ren et al., 2026] and objectives that guide the model to adaptively select reasoning formats
[Wu et al., 2025a].
6

3. The third line of works focused on improving GRPO’s training efficiency, either statistically or
computationally [Dai et al., 2025b, Yu et al., 2025, Lin et al., 2025, Xu et al., 2025b, Zhang
et al., 2025c]. For example, Yan et al. [2025] leveraged off-policy data from stronger models to
provide informative reasoning trajectories and enhance learning. Li et al. [2025a] and Zhan et al.
[2026] reused previously generated trajectories instead of discarding all old samples after each
policy update. Zheng et al. [2025b] explored multiple reasoning paths concurrently to accelerate
reasoning speed, while Xu and Ding [2026] generated only a single sampled output per prompt
to reduce computational cost.
Despite the popularity in developing practical RLVR algorithms, their theoretical foundations
– and those of GRPO specifically – remain largely unexplored. Among those available, Liu et al.
[2025c] and Yang et al. [2026] studied the biases of GRPO’s policy gradient and advantage function
(see Section 3 for formal definitions). Pang and Jin [2025] upper bounded the expected squared
ℓ2 -norm of the gradient for GRPO’s KL-regularized objective. Davis and Recht [2025] and Vojnovic
and Yun [2025] characterized GRPO’s objective function. In particular, Davis and Recht [2025]
proved GRPO optimizes an arcsin transformation of the expected reward, rather than the expected
reward in its original form. More recently, Yao et al. [2026] discussed the off-policy nature of GRPO.
However, these results do not deliver a unified finite-sample and asymptotic characterization of
GRPO, nor do they establish a connection to U-statistics – both of which are precisely what our
theory establishes.

2.3

U-statistics

Our work builds upon the classical theory of U-statistics, a class of estimators introduced by Hoeffding [1948] that generalize the sample mean to averages over functions of multiple random variables
or vectors. Let {Xi }ni=1 denote a sequence of independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) random vectors. A U-statistic of order m is defined by a symmetric kernel function h(X1 , . . . , Xm ).
For instance, a second-order U-statistic with a bivariate kernel h is defined as:
U=

X
1
h(Xi , Xj ).
n(n − 1)

(1)

i̸=j

Its statistical property is largely characterized through the Hoeffding decomposition, which expresses the U-statistic as a sum of several orthogonal components:
n

X
2X
1
[h1 (Xi ) − h0 ] +
[h(Xi , Xj ) − h1 (Xi ) − h1 (Xj ) + h0 ],
U = h0 +
n
n(n − 1)
i=1
i̸=j
|
{z
} |
{z
}
first-order term

(2)

second-order term

where h0 = E[h(X1 , X2 )] is the expectation of the kernel and h1 (x) = E[h(x, X2 )] denotes the
first-order projection.
In the non-degenerate case where Var(h1 (X1 )) > 0, the first-order term dominates the variance
and fluctuates at an order of Op (n−1/2 ), whereas the second-order term decays at a faster rate
of Op (n−1 ). In essence, this decomposition establishes the asymptotic equivalence between a Ustatistic and a simple average of i.i.d. random variables (captured by the first-order term), allowing
classical limit theorems for sample averages to be directly applied to U-statistics. As we will

7

demonstrate in Section 4, this decomposition is instrumental in characterizing the behavior of
GRPO’s policy gradient and its estimated optimal policy.
Owing to their favorable theoretical properties, U-statistics are widely employed across disciplines, including their extension to U-processes in probability theory [Nolan and Pollard, 1987],
their use in semiparametric statistics via higher-order influence functions [Liu et al., 2017], their role
in econometrics through the maximum rank correlation estimator [Han, 1987, Sherman, 1993], and
their application in estimating optimal individualized treatment regimes via concordance-assisted
learning [Fan et al., 2017, Liang et al., 2018].

3

Preliminaries

In this section, we first introduce the sequential decision making problem in RL and formulates LLM
reasoning as a sequential decision making problem (Section 3.1). We next present a meta-algorithm
(see Algorithm 1 for the pseudocode) that unifies a range of policy-based approaches, ranging from
the classical REINFORCE algorithm to more advanced advantage actor-critic methods and variants
of GRPO (Section 3.2).

3.1

Problem setup

RL is a powerful machine learning framework for solving sequential decision making problems. In
this framework, an agent repeatedly interacts with an environment. At each time step, the agent
receives an observation which represents the environment’s current state, and selects an action
based on this information. In response, the environment provides feedback in the form of a reward
and transitions to a new state, yielding the next observation. The agent’s objective is to utilize the
collected observation-action-reward tuples to learn an optimal policy – a mapping from its observed
data history to the space of actions – that maximizes the expected cumulative reward in the long
run.
In natural language processing, text is represented as a sequence of discrete units known as
tokens. Let V denote the vocabulary consisting of all such tokens. LLMs produce text via autoregressive next token prediction. Specifically, given an input prompt X (e.g., a user query)
represented as a sequence of tokens, the model generates the first token Y1 ∈ V sampled from a
conditional distribution πθ (•|X) = P(Y1 = •|X), parameterized by θ ∈ Θ. Next, the second token
Y2 is produced according to πθ (•|X, Y1 ). At each time step t, the model generates Yt according to
πθ (•|X, Y<t ), where Y<t = (Y1 , . . . , Yt−1 ) represents the previously generated prefix. This iterative
procedure continues until the model generates a complete output Y = (Y1 , . . . , YT ), terminating
with an “end-of-sequence” token YT . To handle conditioning sets of varying lengths, a Transformer
architecture [Vaswani et al., 2017] is commonly employed to parameterize πθ . For reasoning tasks,
the output Y contains both a reasoning trace and a final solution (denoted by S); see Figure 1 for
an illustration.
The above procedure can be naturally formulated as a sequential decision making problem.
Specifically, the observation is fixed as the input prompt X, the action at time step t corresponds to
the generated token Yt , and the policy is given by πθ . Unlike standard RL settings where rewards
may be provided at each step, the reward here is sparse and observed only upon completion of
the entire sequence. In GRPO, the terminal reward, denoted by Z, evaluates both the format
consistency of the response (i.e., its adherence to a pre-specified template) and the accuracy of the

8

Algorithm 1 A meta-algorithm for LLM reasoning.
1: Input: Prompt distribution f (X), initial parameters θ0 ∈ Θ, sequence of learning rates {ηi }i∈N ,
(b,g)
batch size B, per-prompt group size G, and baseline functions {Ci }i,b,g .
2: for i = 0, 1, 2, . . . , n − 1 do
iid
3:
Sample a batch of prompts {X (b) }B
b=1 ∼ f (•).
(b)
4:
For each X (b) , generate a group of G outputs {Y (b,g) }G
g=1 ∼ πθi (·|X ).
5:
For each Y (b,g) , obtain its reward Z (b,g) .
6:
Compute the gradient
B

gb(θi ) =

G

1 XXX
(b,g)
(b,g)
(b,g)
∇θ log πθi (Yt
|X (b) , Y<t )(Z (b,g) − Ci )
BG
t
b=1 g=1

Parameter update: θi+1 ← θi + ηi+1 gb(θi ).
8: end for
9: Output: πθn .
7:

final solution S. All intermediate rewards are set to zero. Our goal is to optimize the policy πθ , or
equivalently, the parameter θ, to maximize the expected reward of the generated output Eπθ (Z).
Alternatively, this problem can be viewed from a different perspective by treating the entire
output sequence Y as a single action. This effectively collapses the time horizon T to 1. Consequently, the problem is recast as a bandit problem [e.g., Lai and Robbins, 1985], where the data is
summarized by the context-action-reward (X, Y, Z) tuples.

3.2

A meta-algorithm

Existing RLVR algorithms are policy-based algorithms, grounded in the policy gradient theorem
[Sutton et al., 1999]. This theorem is instrumental as it provides a closed-form expression for the
gradient of the expected reward with respect to the policy parameters, which enables the application
of gradient-based algorithms for parameter optimization. In our specific formulation, the gradient
of the expected reward can be expressed as:
hX
i
g(θ) := ∇θ [Eπθ (Z)] = E
∇θ log πθ (Yt |X, Y<t )Z .
(3)
t

Equation (3) gives rise to the classical REINFORCE algorithm [Williams, 1992]. At the ith iteration, the algorithm (i) samples a prompt X from a reference distribution f (•)1 , (ii) utilizes
the current parameter θi to
Pgenerate an output Y , (iii) computes its reward Z, (iv) constructs a
plug-in estimator gb(θi ) = t ∇θ log πθ (Yt |X, Y<t )Z based on these samples, and (v) updates the
parameters via stochastic gradient ascent θi+1 ← θi + ηi gb(θi ) with learning rate ηi > 0.
While REINFORCE’s gradient estimator is unbiased, it is notoriously susceptible to high variance. A common trick in the literature to reduce its variance is to subtract a baseline term Ci
(which can vary across iterations i) from the reward Z. The rationale lies in that the score function
1
While the true distribution f is unknown, it is typically approximated by the empirical distribution of a finite
set of prompts. In such cases, our established theoretical guarantees are understood to be conditional on this specific
prompt set.

9

P

t ∇θ log πθ (Yt |X, Y<t ) has an expectation of zero.

Consequently, provided that Ci is a function
exclusively of the random variable X (being conditionally independent of Y and Z given X), the
expectation in (3) remains invariant when Z is replaced by its “centered” version, Z − Ci . As such,
the resulting gradient estimator remains unbiased. However, a proper choice of Ci can effectively
reduce the variance of the estimator.
The most widely adopted Ci is the value function V πθi (X) = Eπθi (Z|X). This choice gives rise
to advantage actor-critic (A2C) algorithms [e.g., Mnih et al., 2016], which, in addition to the policy
(the actor), learn a value function (the critic) to estimate the baseline and calculate the advantage
function (the difference between the return and the critic) for variance reduction. However, in
reasoning tasks, maintaining and updating a separate critic network is extremely computationally
intensive. GRPO addresses this inefficiency by eliminating the critic network entirely. It samples
multiple outputs for each prompt and utilizes their group mean as the baseline term (see Equation
(4)). Because sampling from the policy is drastically more efficient than training a critic model,
GRPO offers a highly scalable solution to LLM reasoning. In Section 4, we show that this solution
is also mathematically elegant.
To unify these methods, we introduce the meta-algorithm in Algorithm 1. It incorporates (i)
the centering trick for variance reduction, (ii) minibatch sampling of B prompts per iteration, and
(iii) G sampled outputs per prompt for evaluating the gradient. Several aforementioned algorithms
arise as special cases:
(1,1)

• REINFORCE: Recovered by setting B = 1, G = 1, and Ci
(1,1)

• A2C: Recovered by setting B = 1, G = 1, and Ci

= 0.

to the critic network.
(b,g)

• GRPO-type: Recovered by allowing B, G > 1 and setting Ci
mean 2
P
(b,g)
k̸=g Z
(b,g)
(b,−g)
Ci
= Z̄
:=
.
G−1

to the leave-one-out group
(4)

We conclude this section by noting that while we focus on analyzing Algorithm 1 for building
intuition, it simplifies the standard production-level implementation in three aspects: (i) it omits
the reward normalization used in GRPO; (ii) it does not incorporate the importance sampling
strategy used in GRPO to enhance sample efficiency through multiple gradient updates per batch;
(iii) it excludes the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence penalty, which prevents the policy from
deviating excessively from the reference model. These simplifications were implemented in GRPO
variants such as Dr-GRPO [Liu et al., 2025c] and GPG [Chu et al., 2025], which we analyze
rigorously in Sections 4.1 and 4.2. In Section A of the Supplementary Material, we will bridge
these gaps to align our theoretical analyses with standard GRPO implementations.

4

Main results

This section presents our main theoretical results, where we compare GRPO with two alternatives
to demonstrate its effectiveness. To ensure a fair comparison, all algorithms use the same batch
This is equivalent to using the full group mean G−1
rate by a factor of G/(G − 1).
2

PG

k=1 Z

10

(b,k)

as the baseline, up to a rescaling of the learning

Table 1: Three meta-algorithms compared in Section 4, differing in their choice of baseline term.
Algorithm
Baseline term

Vanilla algorithm
(b,g)

Ci

=0

GRPO-type algorithm
(b,g)

Ci

= Z̄ (b,−g)

Oracle algorithm
(b,g)

Ci

= V πθi (X (b) )

size B and group size G. As summarized in Table 1, their differences lie solely in the choice of the
baseline term. Specifically, we analyze:
(b,g)
(i) a vanilla algorithm, a minibatch variant of REINFORCE that sets Ci
= 0;
(ii) a GRPO-type algorithm, which adopts the group mean defined in (4);
(iii) an oracle algorithm, which uses the true value function V πθi (X) as the baseline;
Notice that the oracle algorithm is not practically implementable: the true value function is
unknown and estimating it via a separate network is computationally expensive, as discussed earlier.
Nevertheless, this algorithm serve as a benchmark whose performance practical algorithms aim to
match. We say that an algorithm achieves the oracle property if it attains asymptotically equivalent
performance to the oracle algorithm.
We next provide a high-level summary of our findings, covering both finite-sample and asymptotic results (see Figure 3 for a roadmap of our results):
• Gradient evaluation: Section 4.1 investigates the properties of policy gradient estimators
employed by GRPO-type algorithms. Specifically, Lemma 1 formally establishes the connection
between the estimator and the U-statistic. Theorem 2 and Proposition 3 derive bounds on its
MSE, which in turn demonstrating the estimator’s superiority over the vanilla algorithm, yielding
its oracle property (Corollary 4) and optimality (Corollary 5).
• Policy optimization: Section 4.2 shifts the focus to the sub-optimality gap of the learned
policy. In particular, Lemma 6 presents a finite-sample upper bound on this gap, upon which
Theorem 7 establishes a scaling law that offers insights into the optimal choice of the group
size. Theorem 8 further establishes the consistency of the parameter estimates and derives the
asymptotic distribution of the sub-optimality gap as a mixture of χ2 random variables without
assuming parameter identifiability. These results verify the oracle property of the GRPO policy
(Corollary 9) as well as its optimality (Corollary 10).
• Practical considerations: Section A of the Supplementary Material extends the aforementioned analyses to accommodate (i) reward standardization; (ii) importance sampling and (iii) the
KL divergence penalty. This section connects the gradient estimator with U-statistics (Lemma
11), characterizes the gradient estimator’s MSE (Theorem 12), and derives the consistency of the
parameter estimates (Proposition 13).

4.1

Group relative gradient evaluation

In this section, we consider the task of evaluating the gradient g(θ) (see Equation (3)). To build
intuition, we begin with estimating g(θ) for a fixed prompt x. This corresponds to the setting where
the prompt distribution f in Algorithm 1 is degenerate at x. The observed data consists of G i.i.d.
output-reward pairs {(Y (g) , Z (g) )}G
g=1 sampled from the model’s policy πθ . Here, we omit the
superscript (b) as the prompt is fixed. We denote the resulting gradient estimators for the vanilla,
11

GRPO-type and oracle algorithms as gbvanilla (x; θ), gbGRPO (x; θ) and gboracle (x; θ), respectively. These
estimators follow the general form,
G

gb(x; θ) =

1 X
∇θ log πθ (Y (g) | x)[Z (g) − C (g) ],
G

(5)

g=1

with different choices of the baseline term C (g) summarized in Table 1.
We begin by demonstrating that the GRPO’s group relative gradient estimator, which contrasts
a realized reward Z against its group average, admits a second-order U-statistic representation.
Lemma 1 (Gradient estimator as a U-statistic). gbGRPO (x; θ) can be written as a second-order
U-statistic:
 −1 X

G
gbGRPO (x; θ) =
h (Y (i) , Z (i) ), (Y (j) , Z (j) ) ,
(6)
2
1≤i<j≤G

with a symmetric kernel

1
h (Y (i) , Z (i) ), (Y (j) , Z (j) ) := [∇θ log πθ (Y (i) |x) − ∇θ log πθ (Y (j) |x)](Z (i) − Z (j) ).
2
The proof of Lemma
1 is straightforward. By setting C (g) in (5) to the group mean baseline
P
Z̄ (−g) = (G − 1)−1 k̸=g Z (g) , each individual term in the sum satisfies
∇θ log πθ (Y (g) | x)[Z (g) − Z̄ (−g) ] =

1 X
∇θ log πθ (Y (g) | x)[Z (g) − Z (k) ].
G−1
k̸=g

Averaging over all g ∈ {1, . . . , G} and applying a standard symmetrization argument allows
gbGRPO (x; θ) to be reformulated as the average of the symmetric kernel h over all pairs, yielding the
U -statistic in (6).
Next, applying the Hoeffding decomposition from (2) partitions the group relative gradient
estimator into three orthogonal components:
(i) the expectation of the kernel, which equals the true gradient
g(x; θ) = Eπθ [∇θ log πθ (Y | x)E(Z|X = x)];
(ii) a first-order term, which can be represented as the difference between the oracle gradient
estimator and g(x; θ), since the first-order projection h1 satisfies
h
i


2h1 (y, z) = E h (y, z), (Y, Z) = ∇θ log πθ (y | x) z − Eπθ (Z | X = x) ,
which is precisely each summand in (5) under the oracle baseline C (g) = V πθ (x);
(iii) a second-order degenerate term.
Since these components are uncorrelated, this decomposition leads to the following MSE bound,
as summarized in Theorem 2.
Assumption 1 (Bounded reward). Z is almost surely bounded.

12

Theorem 2 (MSE conditional on the prompt). Under Assumption 1, we have
MSE(b
gGRPO (x; θ)) := E∥b
gGRPO (x; θ) − g(x; θ)∥2
 E∥∇ log π (Y |x)∥2 
trace[Σoracle (x; θ)]
θ
θ
=
+O
,
G
G2

(7)

where trace[•] denotes the trace of a matrix, Σoracle (x; θ) denotes the asymptotic covariance matrix
of the oracle gradient estimator GCov(b
goracle (x; θ)) and ∥ • ∥ denotes the ℓ2 -norm of a vector.
We make two remarks. First, Assumption 1 is generally satisfied. In GRPO, the reward Z is
typically the sum of a format reward and an accuracy reward, which evaluate the format consistency
and the correctness of the output, respectively. Since both components are bounded within [0, 1],
the final reward Z remains bounded within [0, 2].
Second, the two terms on the second line of (7) correspond to the expected squared ℓ2 -norm of
the first- and second-order projections from the Hoeffding decomposition. Crucially, the first-order
projection serves as the leading term that scales at a rate of G−1 and coincides with the MSE of
the oracle gradient estimator. In contrast, the second-order term decays at a faster rate of G−2 ,
confirming its role as a higher-order residual. This observation establishes the oracle property of
gbGRPO (θ), which we formalize in Corollary 4: as the group size G → ∞, the estimator’s MSE
becomes equivalent to that of the oracle estimator with access to the true value function. In the
official DeepSeekMath implementation, G is set to 64 [Shao et al., 2024], which is sufficiently large
for the residual term to be negligible relative to the leading term.
Next, we extend Theorem 2 to the minibatch setting, where the prompt is no longer fixed at x.
Instead, we sample B i.i.d. prompts {X (b) }B
b=1 and G output-reward pairs per prompt to estimate
g(θ) = EX∼f (•) [g(X; θ)].

(8)

Accordingly, we define the vanilla, oracle, and GRPO-type minibatch gradient estimators as the
empirical average of the prompt-specific estimators:
B

gb(θ) =

1 X
gb(X (b) ; θ).
B
b=1

Proposition 3 (MSE in the minibatch setting). Under Assumption 1, we have
MSE(b
gGRPO (θ)) := E∥b
gGRPO (θ) − g(θ)∥2
=

 E∥∇ log π (Y |X)∥2 
E∥g(X; θ) − g(θ)∥2 trace[Σoracle (θ)]
θ
θ
+
+O
,
B
BG
BG2

(9)

where Σoracle (θ) = E[Σoracle (X; θ)].
In the minibatch setting, the MSE is further reduced by a factor of B −1 . The first term in
the second line of (9) represents the inherent variance arising from prompt sampling, which is
independent of G and shared by all gradient estimators (e.g., vanilla, oracle). Equation (9) is
instrumental in deriving our scaling law detailed in the next section. To elaborate, suppose we fix
the sampling budget per prompt as N = B × G. Then B = N/G, so the first term scales linearly
with G, the second term is constant when N is fixed, and the third term scales inversely with G.
Consequently, there exists an optimal choice of G that is neither too small nor too large, balancing
13

the first and third terms to minimize the MSE. As we will show later, the MSE is closely related to
the suboptimality gap of the learned policy, and thus there exists a corresponding G that minimizes
this suboptimality gap.
Additionally, as G → ∞, the MSE of the GRPO-type gradient again becomes equivalent to
that of the oracle gradient, and we formalize such oracle property below.
Corollary 4 (Oracle property of gradient estimator). Let MSEA (•) denote the asymptotic MSE of
a gradient estimator, obtained by removing errors that are high-order in the group size G, we have
MSEA (b
gGRPO (x; θ)) = MSE(b
goracle (x; θ)) and MSEA (b
gGRPO (θ)) = MSE(b
goracle (θ)).
Finally, we establish the optimality of the GRPO estimator in Corollary 5 by demonstrating
the following properties: (i) it asymptotically minimizes the MSE within the class of gradient
estimators of the form (5) where the baseline term is a function of the prompt x only; and (ii) its
asymptotic MSE is strictly smaller than that of the vanilla algorithm.
Assumption 2 (Conditional uncorrelation). ∥∇θ log πθ (Y |X)∥2 is conditionally uncorrelated of Z
given X.
Corollary 5 (Optimality of gradient estimator). Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. For any
gradient estimator gb(x; θ) of the form (5) whose baseline term is a function of the prompt x only,
we have
MSEA (b
gGRPO (x; θ)) ≤ MSE(b
g (x; θ))

and

MSEA (b
gGRPO (θ)) ≤ MSE(b
g (θ)).

In particular, provided that the score functions ∇θ log πθ (Y | x), ∇θ log πθ (Y | X) and the value
function V πθ (X) are not almost surely zero, and V πθ (x) ̸= 0,
MSEA (b
gGRPO (x; θ)) < MSE(b
gvanilla (x; θ))

and

MSEA (b
gGRPO (θ)) < MSE(b
gvanilla (θ)).

To conclude this section, we remark that Assumption 2 ensures that the oracle gradient estimator minimizes the MSE within the class of unbiased policy gradient estimators [Greensmith et al.,
2004]. This assumption is well-supported by the empirical success of modern RL algorithms such
as advantage actor-critic and PPO, which prioritize the value function as the optimal baseline for
variance reduction.

4.2

Group relative policy optimization

This section turns to policy optimization and investigates the properties of the policy learned by
Algorithm 1. For a given policy π, we evaluate its performance via the suboptimality gap, defined
as the difference in the expected return between π and the optimal policy:
∆(π) = max Eπθ (Z) − Eπ (Z)
θ∈Θ

By definition, a smaller gap indicates a policy closer to the optimal one. Additionally, the suboptimality gap measures only the quality of the final policy obtained at the last iteration. In the RL
literature, an alternative metric is regret, which quantifies the cumulative difference between the
optimal policy and the sequence of intermediate policies across iterations. However, we adopt the
suboptimality gap because it better reflects practical LLM applications: once training is complete,
14

only the final policy is deployed in practice. This criterion also aligns with the evaluation metric
in deployment-efficient RL [e.g., Huang et al., 2022].
We begin with the following set of conditions under which we establish a finite-sample error
bound for the suboptimality gap of the meta-algorithm in Lemma 6.
Assumption 3 (L-smoothness). The expected return Eπθ (Z) is L-smooth with respect to θ. That
is, its gradient g(•) is differentiable and Lipschitz continuous with some constant L > 0 such that:
∥g(θ1 ) − g(θ2 )∥ ≤ L∥θ1 − θ2 ∥,

∀θ1 , θ2 ∈ Θ.

Additionally, the score function ∇θ log πθ is uniformly bounded and continuous in θ.
Assumption 4 (Polyak-Lojasiewicz (PL) condition). There exists some constant µ > 0 such that
∥g(θ)∥2 ≥ 2µ∆(πθ ),

∀θ ∈ Θ.

(10)

Assumption 5 (Learning rate). The sequence of learning rates {ηi }i≥1 in Algorithm 1 satisfies
either (a) a constant schedule where ηi = β for some 0 < β < (2L)−1 , or (b) an 1/i schedule where
ηi = i−1 β for some constant β > (2µ)−1 .
The L-smoothness condition (Assumption 3) is standard in the optimization literature [e.g.,
Nesterov, 2013]. It requires the gradient of the expected return to be a Lipschitz continuous
function of θ. The PL condition (Assumption 4) is substantially weaker than the strong concavity
condition commonly imposed in the literature [e.g., Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004]. Specifically,
strong concavity requires a unique global optimizer and a strictly negative definite Hessian matrix
∇2θ Eπθ (Z) – both requirements are likely violated in over-parameterized models such as LLMs.
The PL condition, to the contrary, accommodates landscapes with multiple global optimizers
and singular Hessians. To see this, consider a hypothetical two-dimensional example
where
θ =


−2
0
has an
(θ1 , θ2 ), Θ = R2 , and the expected return is Eπθ (Z) = −θ12 . Its Hessian matrix
0 0
eigenvalue of 0 and is therefore not negative definite, violating strong concavity. Nonetheless, its
gradient is g(θ) = (−2θ1 , 0)⊤ , which satisfies (10) for any µ ≤ 2.
Finally, Assumption 5 considers two standard learning rate schedules. The constant schedule
(a) is common in practical applications [Sheng et al., 2025]. To the contrary, the 1/i schedule (b) is
motivated by stochastic approximation theory: it ensures that the suboptimality gap theoretically
achieves the optimal convergence rate [Zhang, 2016].
Lemma 6 (Finite-sample sub-optimality gap). Suppose Assumptions 1 and 3–5 hold. Suppose
(b,g)
each Ci
in Algorithm 1 is either a function of X (b) or a GRPO-type baseline in (4). Let M =
supθ MSE(b
g (θ)) denote the uniform upper bound on the MSE of this algorithm’s gradient estimator.
Then for any n ≥ 1, under the constant schedule (a), the output policy of πθn satisfies
E[∆(πθn )] ≤ (1 − 2µβ + Lµβ 2 )n E[∆(πθ0 )] +

Lβ 2 M
,
4µβ − 2Lµβ 2

where the expectation is taken with respect to the randomness in the estimator θn and any randomness in the initial parameter θ0 . Under the 1/i schedule (b), we have
 (1 + ϵ)Lβ 2 M c 
E[∆(πθn )] ≤ max
,
,
(4µβ − 2)n n
for any sufficiently small ϵ > 0, where c is a positive constant depending only on (β, µ, L, ϵ).
15

Lemma 6 provides a unified analysis for the meta-algorithm, covering vanilla, oracle, and GRPOtype estimators under both learning rate schedules. The bounds reveal that the sub-optimality gap:
(i) scales with the smoothness constant L; (ii) decreases with the PL constant µ and the number
of iterations n; and (iii) is crucially governed by the MSE of the gradient estimator M . As this
MSE is the dominant factor (for the constant schedule) and the convergence rate constant (for the
1/i schedule), the oracle property and optimality we established for the GRPO gradient estimator
directly translates into the learned policy’s performance. By substituting the MSE bounds derived
in Proposition 3 into Lemma 6, we can explicitly characterize how the group size G and batch size
B affects the suboptimality gap, leading to the following scaling law for GRPO:
Theorem 7 (Scaling law for GRPO). For GRPO-type algorithms, the sub-optimality upper bounds
established in Lemma 6 depend on B and G through the following quantity
c1
c2
c3
+
+
,
B
BG BG2

(11)

where the constants are given by c1 = supθ E∥g(X; θ) − g(θ)∥22 , c2 = supθ trace[Σoracle (θ)] and
c3 = O(supθ E∥∇θ log πθ (Y |X)∥2 ).
Under a fixed sampling budget N = BG per iteration or a total sampling budget N = nBG, the
optimal group size G∗ that minimizes the sub-optimality upper bounds is:
r
c3
∗
.
(12)
G =
c1
In GRPO, sampling reasoning traces from the learning policy (Line 4 of Algorithm 1) is computationally expensive. With a fixed sampling budget, Equation (11) reveals a trade-off in the
allocation of computational resources. A small G allows for a larger batch size B and more iterations n, which reduces the first variance term in (11) and accelerates the convergence rates
established in Lemma 6. Conversely, a large G reduces the higher-order residual term (the third
term in (11)).
Our scaling law proposed in (12) explicitly balances this trade-off. Crucially, the optimal group
size G∗ is universal : it is independent of the budget N , the number of iterations n and the learning
rate schedule. Instead, G∗ depends solely on the underlying data generating process and the
geometry of the policy space. This makes our result highly practical for implementation, as the
optimal group size remains constant for a given task regardless of the total compute available. We
will verify this observation empirically in Section 5. While the constants ci are formally defined
as suprema over the parameter space, they may yield conservative theoretical bounds. In practice,
these suprema can be relaxed by estimating the constants at a few representative parameter values
(e.g., those of the reference model).
We remark that the aforementioned results apply only to upper bounds on the suboptimality
gap. Although GRPO attains a sharper upper bound, this does not necessarily imply that it
achieves a strictly smaller suboptimality gap. To rigorously establish its superior performance,
a more refined characterization of its suboptimality gap – beyond bounds – is required. This
motivates our study of its asymptotic distribution in Theorem 8 below.
Nonetheless, the asymptotic analysis presents substantial theoretical challenges. Most classical
asymptotic results rely on the uniqueness of the population-level optimizer (i.e., a unique θ∗ that
maximizes Eπθ (Z)) and the strict negative definiteness of the Hessian matrix H(θ∗ ) at that optimum. In overparameterized models such as LLMs, both assumptions are inherently violated. This
16

leads to two complications: (i) Parameter convergence is not well-defined in the classical sense: the
estimators may oscillate within an optimal manifold of population-level maximizers and approach
different maximizers across iterations. This lack of identifiability prevents the sequence of estimators from converging to a single fixed point. (ii) The parameter’s asymptotic distribution becomes
analytically intractable, since the estimator fails to converge to a fixed point in the first place.
To address the first challenge, we shift our focus from point-wise convergence to set-wise convergence. We define Θ∗ as the set of all population-level maximizers,
Θ∗ = {θ ∈ Θ : θ ∈ arg max
Eπθ∗ (Z)},
∗
θ ∈Θ

and characterize parameter convergence by the distance of the estimator θn to the set Θ∗ ,
d(θn , Θ∗ ) = ∗inf ∗ ∥θn − θ∗ ∥.
θ ∈Θ
P

We say the estimator θn is consistent if d(θn , Θ∗ ) → 0 as n → ∞. To address the second challenge,
we recognize that while the parameter estimates are non-identifiable, the suboptimality gap remains
identifiable. We thus analyze the asymptotic distribution of the suboptimality gap rather than the
parameters themselves.
Consider the asymptotic regime where the number of iterations n → ∞ and other parameters
such as the batch size B and group size G are constant. For this analysis, we adopt the 1/i
schedule for the learning rate. This is motivated by Lemma 6: under the constant learning rate
schedule, the sub-optimality gap might not converge to zero when B and G are fixed. While
one could theoretically allow B and G to grow with n or explore alternative decay schedules, these
configurations introduce substantial technical complexity into the proofs without altering our major
findings. We focus on this specific regime to more clearly elucidate the performance of GRPO, and
impose the following conditions.
Assumption 6 (Compact support). The parameter space Θ is compact.
Assumption 7 (Hessian matrices). Θ∗ is closed and convex, and all Hessian matrices at Θ∗ share
the same rank r. Moreover, there exists an orthogonal projection matrix Q and a strictly negative
definite matrix H ∗ such that Q⊤ Q = Ir and Q⊤ H(θ∗ )Q = H ∗ , ∀θ∗ ∈ Θ∗ .
Assumption 8 (Convergence of covariance matrix). There exists a (possibly random) matrix Γ
such that the following holds almost surely as n → ∞,
n
o
E (b
g (θn ) − g(θn ))(b
g (θn ) − g(θn ))⊤ θn → Γ.
Assumption 9 (Weak strong concavity). Let ΠΘ∗ denote the projection operator such that ΠΘ∗ (θ) :=
arg minx∈Θ∗ d(θ, x), we have
⟨g(θ), ΠΘ∗ (θ) − θ⟩ ≥ µd2 (θ, Θ∗ ),

∀θ ∈ Θ.

Assumption 6 is mild and commonly imposed in the literature [e.g., Schmidt-Hieber, 2020].
Assumption 7 relaxes the standard identifiability condition by allowing the population parameter
to form a connected manifold rather than a unique point. It assumes that, after projection onto a
suitable r-dimensional subspace, the parameter becomes identifiable with a strictly negative definite Hessian H ∗ . This effectively decomposes the parameter space into an identifiable component
17

defined through the transformation matrix Q and a non-identifiable component along its orthogonal complement. Assumption 8 is not overly restrictive, as the limiting matrix Γ is allowed to be
random. The resulting asymptotic distribution can be interpreted as a mixture distribution: first,
Γ is realized, and then the limiting distribution is obtained conditionally on Γ. Finally, Assumption
9 imposes a weak strong concavity (WSC) condition. It is weaker than strong concavity (which
entails a unique optimizer) but stronger than PL (Assumption 4). In contrast to strong concavity,
WSC does not require the objective function to be globally concave in all directions, but only along
directions that point toward the optimal set Θ∗ . Thus, the objective function Eπθ (Z) may remain
flat along other directions, allowing multiple optimizers to exist. Under the L-smoothness condition
(Assumption 3), it can be shown that WSC implies the PL condition.
Theorem 8 (Consistency & asymptotic distribution). Suppose Assumptions 1, 3, 4, 5(b) and 6
(b,g)
hold. Suppose each Ci
in Algorithm 1 is either a function of X (b) or a GRPO-type baseline in
P

(4). Then the estimator θn is consistent in the sense that d(θn , Θ∗ ) → 0.
Suppose Assumptions 7 – 9 hold additionally. Then the output policy satisfies
d

n∆(πθn ) →

r
X

wk χ21,k ,

k=1

where r is the rank of the Hessian matrix, {χ21,k }rk=1 are i.i.d. χ21 random variables, and {wk }rk=1
are positive weights arranged in non-increasing order, determined by the asymptotic covariance
matrix of the gradient estimators (see step (iv) of the proof of Theorem 8 in the Supplementary
Material).
Theorem 8 is novel in two respects: (i) It establishes the asymptotic distribution of the suboptimality gap for policy gradient estimators as a weighted sum of independent χ2 random variables,
whereas most existing literature focuses primarily on finite-sample error bounds. (ii) It derives this
limiting distribution in the overparameterized regime, which goes beyond the classical assumption
of a unique optimizer with a non-singular Hessian.
Nonetheless, establishing such a result in the overparameterized regime is non-trivial. While
classical results have established CLTs for parameter estimates in stochastic gradient algorithms
[e.g., Zhang, 2016], these results do not directly apply due to overparameterization. Our key idea
is to first establish a CLT for the subset of parameters corresponding to directions in which the
Hessian is negative definite. A second-order Taylor expansion then shows that the suboptimality
gap is driven entirely by the asymptotic behavior of these directions, which facilitates the derivation
of its limit.
As mentioned earlier, the weights wk s are determined by the covariance matrices of the gradient
estimators. The oracle and optimality properties of GRPO gradient estimators (Corollaries 4 and
5) directly affect these weights, which in turn establishes the oracle and optimality properties of
the GRPO policy. We summarize these results in Corollaries 9 and 10 below.
Corollary 9 (Oracle property of the policy). Suppose the assumptions in Theorem 8 hold. Suppose
the projected covariance matrix Ω(θ∗ ) = Cov(Q⊤ gb(θ∗ )) depends on θ∗ ∈ Θ∗ only through Q⊤ θ∗ and
is non-singular. Then GRPO’s weights and oracle weights satisfy wk,GRPO − wk,oracle = O(G−2 ).
Consequently, the suboptimality gap of GRPO is asymptotically equivalent to that of the oracle
algorithm as G → ∞.
18

(a) Base model

(b) Instruct model

(c) ICL model

Figure 4: MSEs of three policy gradient estimators (vanilla, GRPO-type, and oracle) under three
model configurations (base, instruct and in-context learning (ICL)) for different group sizes. Error
bars represent 95% confidence intervals of the empirically estimated MSEs.
Corollary 10 (Optimality of the policy). Suppose the assumptions in Corollary 9 hold. Suppose
Q⊤ ∇θ log πθ∗ (Y |X)[∇θ log πθ∗ (Y |X)]⊤ Q is conditionally uncorrelated with Z given X, for some
θ∗ ∈ Θ∗ . Then for any meta-algorithm whose baseline term is a function of the prompt only,
its weights satisfy wk ≥ wk,oracle + O(G−2 ). Consequently, as G → ∞, its suboptimality gap is
asymptotically no smaller than that of GRPO.

5

Experiments

We conduct two sets of experiments in this section to validate our theoretical findings. In Section 5.1, we empirically compare GRPO with the vanilla and oracle algorithms in terms of gradient
evaluation, to verify the oracle property of the GRPO gradient estimator (Corollary 4) and its superiority over the vanilla estimator (Corollary 5). In Section 5.2, we investigate the optimal group
size for policy optimization, to verify the universality of the optimal group size G∗ established by
our scaling law (Theorem 7).

5.1

Oracle property in gradient evaluation

We first evaluate the MSE of the three gradient estimators introduced in Section 4.1: vanilla,
GRPO-type, and oracle. To conduct this comparison, we construct a synthetic arithmetic dataset
consisting of 500 questions. Each question is a medium-difficulty integer arithmetic problem, sampled uniformly from five categories: (i) two-step addition or subtraction, (ii) three-step addition
or subtraction, (iii) single-step multiplication, (iv) integer division, and (v) addition or subtraction
with parentheses. For each generated problem, we record the ground-truth solution. We then query
an LLM (the prompt is provided in Section C of the Supplementary Material), extract the solution
from its output, and compute a binary reward indicating whether the solution equals the ground
truth.
We evaluate gradients aggregated over the 500 questions (see Equation (8)) with respect to
three target policies, derived from three models with progressively stronger reasoning capabilities: (i) Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B Base model, (ii) Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B Instruct model, and (iii)
Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B Instruct model with in-context learning [ICL, Brown et al., 2020]. For the
third model, in addition to the prompt, we provide a few-shot in-context demonstration containing
several arithmetic questions with solutions (see Section C of the Supplementary Material). These
19

models produce target policies of different quality: the base model is expected to achieve the lowest accuracy, while the ICL model attains the highest. We also consider multiple groups sizes
G ∈ {4, 8, 16, 32, 64} to estimate the gradient and use Monte Carlo simulations to evaluate each
gradient estimator’s MSE and report their associated 95% confidence interval in Figure 4.
We make the following observations:
1. Across all combinations of group size and target policy, the vanilla estimator (blue line) exhibits
the largest MSE, reflecting the well-known high-variance nature of REINFORCE. In contrast,
the GRPO-type estimator (orange line) achieves significantly smaller MSEs in all cases, which
verifies the second assertion of Corollary 5 and demonstrates its superiority over the vanilla
estimator.
2. The oracle estimator (green line) achieves the smallest MSE, as expected. Nevertheless, with
a moderately large group size (G = 8), the MSE of the GRPO-type estimator is already close
to that of the oracle estimator. As G increases further (e.g., G = 32 or 64), the two estimators
become nearly indistinguishable, confirming the oracle property in Corollary 4.
3. Finally, the MSE of all estimators decreases as the group size G increases. It also decreases
with the model’s reasoning capability. This behavior is expected as well: as the model becomes
stronger, its outputs are more likely to be correct and thus more deterministic. Conversely,
weaker models generate more random outputs, which enlarges the variance of the gradient
estimator.

5.2

Optimal group size for policy optimization

As shown in our theoretical analysis and empirical results (Section 5.2), increasing the group size
G reduces the MSE of the GRPO-type gradient estimator. However, a larger G also increases
computational cost, as more outputs must be sampled per prompt. Under a fixed sampling budget
(i.e., a fixed total number of sampled outputs), our scaling law in Theorem 7 shows that the optimal
group size G∗ depends only on the data and the policy model, and is universal with respect to other
parameters such as the number of iterations n and the total budget per prompt N . In this section,
we verify this universality using two widely adopted math reasoning benchmark datasets, GSM8K
[Cobbe et al., 2021] and MATH [Hendrycks et al., 2021].
We first utilize GSM8K to examine the universality of G∗ across different training iterations
n. Specifically, we fix the total sampling budget per prompt at N = BG = 1024 and evaluate six
candidate group sizes: G ∈ {4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128}. For each choice of G, we apply GRPO to fine-tune
the Qwen2.5-1.5B Instruct model and calculate its test accuracy, defined as the percentage of
correctly solved problems in the test dataset. In addition to reporting the final accuracy at the last
iteration, we also record accuracy at intermediate checkpoints where n ∈ {200, 300, 400, 600, 800}.
Given the inherent stochasticity of RLVR – arising, for example, from randomness in sampled
outputs – which often leads to high variance across runs, we repeat the training five times for each
value of G. We report the mean accuracy along with its associated confidence interval in Figure 5.
We note that much of the existing literature reports results from a single training run due to the
substantial computational cost of training, which can lead to results that are difficult to reproduce.
We make the following observations from Figure 5:
1. Except at training step n = 200, the test accuracy generally increases with the group size G and
then decreases as G becomes larger. This trend is consistent with the scaling law in Theorem 7.
20

Step 200

Step 300

Step 400

Step 600

Step 800

Final Step

Figure 5: Test accuracy of GRPO-fine-tuned models at different training steps with a fixed sampling
budget of N = B × G = 1024 per prompt. Both training and evaluation are conducted on GSM8K.
Each curve shows accuracy as a function of the group size G ∈ {4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128}. Results are
averaged over five independent runs, with shaded regions visualizing 95% confidence bands.
When G is small, the second-order residual term can be large, inflating the variance of the
gradient estimator. Conversely, when G is large, fixing the total sampling budget forces the
batch size B to be small, which enlarges the first variance term in (11). As a result, the optimal
group size G∗ lies between these two extremes.
2. With the exception of n = 200, the optimal group size is consistently G∗ = 32 across all training
steps, demonstrating the universality of G∗ with respect to n. For n = 300 and n = 800, the
performance with G = 16 is very close to that with G = 32. However, its accuracy deteriorates
more noticeably for other values of n.
3. Finally, the differences in test accuracy across different values of G are mostly statistically
insignificant, as only five independent runs are conducted for each setting. This limitation is
due to the high computational cost of training. While increasing the number of runs could yield
more statistically meaningful conclusions, doing so is not computationally feasible at this stage.
We next use the MATH dataset to assess the universality of the optimal group size G∗ across
different sampling budgets N . The procedure closely follows that used for GSM8K: we consider the same candidate group sizes G ∈ {4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128} and train the model separately
for each choice of G. The differences are that, for MATH, we fine-tune a larger and more powerful
Qwen2.5-Math-7B model, and we evaluate three different sampling budgets, N ∈ {1024, 2048, 4096}.
Test accuracies of the resulting trained models are reported in Table 2.
It can be seen that the optimal group size is mostly 64, but increases to 128 as the sampling
budget grows. We suspect this shift is due to the finite number of prompts, which remains constant
21

Table 2: Test accuracy of GRPO-fine-tuned models at the final training step. Each row reports
accuracy as a function of the group size G ∈ 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128 with a fixed sampling budget per
prompt; the sampling budget varies across rows. Both training and evaluation are conducted on
MATH. Due to the high computational cost of training a 7B model, results are reported from a
single run, with the highest accuracy highlighted in bold.
Group size G

Sampling budget
1024
2048
4096

4

8

16

32

64

128

0.7677
0.7703
0.7691

0.7491
0.7679
0.7713

0.7753
0.7697
0.7701

0.7627
0.7793
0.7673

0.7817
0.7819
0.7703

0.7743
0.7665
0.7757

with respect to the batch size B and group size G, and is not accounted for in our theoretical
analysis for simplicity. Meanwhile, when the sampling budget is fixed at 1024, the optimal G∗ is
larger than that for GSM8K. This shift is expected, as the constants in (11) depend on the data and
the model, and thus the optimal G∗ varies accordingly. These results suggest that larger models
may benefit from a larger group size during training.

6

Conclusion

This paper provides a rigorous theoretical analysis of GRPO, a cornerstone algorithm for enhancing the reasoning capabilities of LLMs. We show that GRPO is a statistically principled policy
gradient algorithm whose gradient estimator naturally forms a U-statistic (Lemma 1). Leveraging
Hoeffding’s decomposition, we characterize its MSE (Theorem 2, Proposition 3) and establish both
oracle (Corollary 4) and optimality (Corollary 5) properties. For policy optimization, we derive
explicit bounds on GRPO’s suboptimality gap (Lemma 6), leading to a scaling law that informs
the optimal choice of group size (Theorem 7). We characterize the asymptotic distribution of the
suboptimality gap (Theorem 8), confirming GRPO’s oracle (Corollary 9) and optimality (Corollary
10) properties in policy learning. We further extend these results to practical settings by accommodating reward normalization, importance sampling, and KL-divergence penalties (Lemma 11,
Theorem 12, Proposition 13). Finally, we empirically validate GRPO’s gradient estimator’s oracle and optimality properties (Figure 4), and verify our scaling law with respect to group size G,
demonstrating its universality across training iterations (Figure 5) and sampling budgets (Table
2).

References
Arash Ahmadian, Chris Cremer, Matthias Gallé, Marzieh Fadaee, Julia Kreutzer, Olivier Pietquin,
Ahmet Üstün, and Sara Hooker. Back to basics: Revisiting reinforce-style optimization for learning from human feedback in llms. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 12248–12267, 2024.
Gholamali Aminian, Amir R. Asadi, Idan Shenfeld, and Youssef Mroueh. Kl-regularized rlhf with
multiple reference models: Exact solutions and sample complexity. In Advances in Neural Infor22

mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 38, 2025. URL https://neurips.cc/virtual/
2025/poster/116496.
OpenAI: Marcin Andrychowicz, Bowen Baker, Maciek Chociej, Rafal Jozefowicz, Bob McGrew,
Jakub Pachocki, Arthur Petron, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Alex Ray, et al. Learning
dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 39(1):3–20,
2020.
Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Bibhas Chakraborty and Erica E Moodie. Statistical methods for dynamic treatment regimes.
Springer-Verlag. doi, 10(978-1):4–1, 2013.
Elynn Y Chen, Rui Song, and Michael I Jordan. Reinforcement learning in latent heterogeneous
environments. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 119(548):3113–3126, 2024.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Michael Laskin, Pieter
Abbeel, Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via
sequence modeling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 15084–15097,
2021.
Minghan Chen, Guikun Chen, Wenguan Wang, and Yi Yang. Seed-grpo: Semantic entropy enhanced grpo for uncertainty-aware policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.12346, 2025.
Daixuan Cheng, Shaohan Huang, Xuekai Zhu, Bo Dai, Wayne Xin Zhao, Zhenliang Zhang, and
Furu Wei. Reasoning with exploration: An entropy perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14758,
2025.
Sayak Ray Chowdhury, Anush Kini, and Nagarajan Natarajan. Provably robust dpo: Aligning
language models with noisy feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.00409, 2024.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Milos Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
reinforcement learning from human preferences. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pages 4299–4307, 2017.
Xiangxiang Chu, Hailang Huang, Xiao Zhang, Fei Wei, and Yong Wang. Gpg: A simple and strong
reinforcement learning baseline for model reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02546, 2025.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to
solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Will Dabney, Mark Rowland, Marc Bellemare, and Rémi Munos. Distributional reinforcement
learning with quantile regression. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
volume 32, 2018.

23

Muzhi Dai, Shixuan Liu, and Qingyi Si. Stable reinforcement learning for efficient reasoning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.18086, 2025a.
Runpeng Dai, Linfeng Song, Haolin Liu, Zhenwen Liang, Dian Yu, Haitao Mi, Zhaopeng Tu, Rui
Liu, Tong Zheng, Hongtu Zhu, et al. Cde: Curiosity-driven exploration for efficient reinforcement
learning in large language models. In The 5th Workshop on Mathematical Reasoning and AI at
NeurIPS 2025, 2025b.
Damek Davis and Benjamin Recht. What is the objective of reasoning with reinforcement learning?
arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.13651, 2025.
Zheng Ding and Weirui Ye. TreeGRPO: Tree-advantage GRPO for online RL post-training of
diffusion models. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=3rZdp4TmUb.
Damien Ernst, Pierre Geurts, and Louis Wehenkel. Tree-based batch mode reinforcement learning.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6, 2005.
Ashkan Ertefaie and Robert L Strawderman. Constructing dynamic treatment regimes over indefinite time horizons. Biometrika, 105(4):963–977, 2018.
Caiyun Fan, Wenbin Lu, Rui Song, and Yong Zhou. Concordance-assisted learning for estimating
optimal individualized treatment regimes. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
(Statistical Methodology), 79(5):1565–1582, 2017.
Jianqing Fan, Zhaoran Wang, Yuchen Xie, and Zhuoran Yang. A theoretical analysis of deep
q-learning. In Learning for dynamics and control, pages 486–489. PMLR, 2020.
Xingdong Feng, Yuling Jiao, Lican Kang, Baqun Zhang, and Fan Zhou. Over-parameterized deep
nonparametric regression for dependent data with its applications to reinforcement learning.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(383):1–40, 2023.
Asim H Gazi, Yongyi Guo, Daiqi Gao, Ziping Xu, Kelly W Zhang, and Susan A Murphy. Statistical
reinforcement learning in the real world: A survey of challenges and future directions. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2601.15353, 2026.
Lin Ge, Hengrui Cai, Runzhe Wan, Yang Xu, and Rui Song. A review of causal decision making.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16156, 2025.
Evan Greensmith, Peter L Bartlett, and Jonathan Baxter. Variance reduction techniques for gradient estimates in reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 5(Nov):1471–
1530, 2004.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu
Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1 incentivizes reasoning in llms through reinforcement learning. Nature, 645(8081):633–638, 2025.
Aaron K. Han. Non-parametric analysis of a generalized regression model: The maximum rank
correlation estimator. Journal of Econometrics, 35(2):303–316, 1987.

24

Yaru Hao, Li Dong, Xun Wu, Shaohan Huang, Zewen Chi, and Furu Wei. On-policy rl with optimal
reward baseline. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23585, 2025.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn
Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset.
In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks
Track (Round 2), 2021.
Wassily Hoeffding. A class of statistics with asymptotically normal distribution. The Annals of
Mathematical Statistics, 19(3):293–325, 1948.
Jian Hu, Jason Klein Liu, and Wei Shen. Reinforce++: An efficient rlhf algorithm with robustness
to both prompt and reward models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.03262, 2025.
Jiawei Huang, Jinglin Chen, Li Zhao, Tao Qin, Nan Jiang, and Tie-Yan Liu. Towards deploymentefficient reinforcement learning: Lower bound and optimality. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2022.
Aaron Jaech, Adam Kalai, Adam Lerer, Adam Richardson, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aiden Low, Alec
Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Alex Beutel, Alex Carney, et al. Openai o1 system card. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.16720, 2024.
Nan Jiang. A note on loss functions and error compounding in model-based reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.09946, 2024.
Nan Jiang and Lihong Li. Doubly robust off-policy value evaluation for reinforcement learning. In
International conference on machine learning, pages 652–661. PMLR, 2016.
Ying Jin, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Is pessimism provably efficient for offline rl?
International conference on machine learning, pages 5084–5096. PMLR, 2021.

In

Ying Jin, Zhimei Ren, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Policy learning “without” overlap:
Pessimism and generalized empirical bernstein’s inequality. The Annals of Statistics, 53(4):
1483–1512, 2025.
Keller Jordan, Yuchen Jin, Vlado Boza, You Jiacheng, Franz Cesista, Laker Newhouse, and
Jeremy Bernstein. Muon: An optimizer for hidden layers in neural networks, 2024. URL
https://kellerjordan. github. io/posts/muon, 6(3):4, 2024.
Nathan Kallus and Masatoshi Uehara. Efficiently breaking the curse of horizon in off-policy evaluation with double reinforcement learning. Operations Research, 70(6):3282–3302, 2022.
Vijay Konda and John Tsitsiklis. Actor-critic algorithms. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 12, 1999.
Michael R Kosorok and Eric B Laber. Precision medicine. Annual review of statistics and its
application, 6(1):263–286, 2019.
Aviral Kumar, Justin Fu, Matthew Soh, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Stabilizing off-policy
q-learning via bootstrapping error reduction. Advances in neural information processing systems,
32, 2019.
25

Tze Leung Lai and Herbert Robbins. Asymptotically efficient adaptive allocation rules. Advances
in applied mathematics, 6(1):4–22, 1985.
Nathan Lambert, Jacob Morrison, Valentina Pyatkin, Shengyi Huang, Hamish Ivison, Faeze Brahman, Lester James Validad Miranda, Alisa Liu, Nouha Dziri, Xinxi Lyu, Yuling Gu, Saumya
Malik, Victoria Graf, Jena D. Hwang, Jiangjiang Yang, Ronan Le Bras, Oyvind Tafjord, Christopher Wilhelm, Luca Soldaini, Noah A. Smith, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi, and Hannaneh
Hajishirzi. Tulu 3: Pushing frontiers in open language model post-training. In Second Conference
on Language Modeling, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=i1uGbfHHpH.
Seong Jin Lee, Will Wei Sun, and Yufeng Liu. Low-rank contextual reinforcement learning from
heterogeneous human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19436, 2024.
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial, review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.
Gen Li, Laixi Shi, Yuxin Chen, Yuejie Chi, and Yuting Wei. Settling the sample complexity of
model-based offline reinforcement learning. The Annals of Statistics, 52(1):233–260, 2024a.
Siheng Li, Zhanhui Zhou, Wai Lam, Chao Yang, and Chaochao Lu. Repo: Replay-enhanced policy
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09340, 2025a.
Yuhan Li, Eugene Han, Yifan Hu, Zhengling Qi, Yifan Cui, and Ruoqing Zhu. Reinforcement learning with continuous actions under unmeasured confounding. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, To appear, 2025b.
Zhen Li, Jie Chen, Eric Laber, Fang Liu, and Richard Baumgartner. Optimal treatment regimes:
a review and empirical comparison. International Statistical Review, 91(3):427–463, 2023.
Ziniu Li, Tian Xu, Yushun Zhang, Zhihang Lin, Yang Yu, Ruoyu Sun, and Zhi-Quan Luo. Remax: a
simple, effective, and efficient reinforcement learning method for aligning large language models.
In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’24. JMLR.org,
2024b.
Shuhan Liang, Wenbin Lu, Rui Song, and Lan Wang. Sparse concordance-assisted learning for
optimal treatment decision. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(202):1–26, 2018.
Peng Liao, Zhengling Qi, Runzhe Wan, Predrag Klasnja, and Susan A Murphy. Batch policy
learning in average reward markov decision processes. Annals of statistics, 50(6):3364, 2022.
Zhihang Lin, Mingbao Lin, Yuan Xie, and Rongrong Ji. Cppo: Accelerating the training of group
relative policy optimization-based reasoning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.22342, 2025.
Kaizhao Liu, Qi Long, Zhekun Shi, Weijie J Su, and Jiancong Xiao. Statistical impossibility and
possibility of aligning llms with human preferences: From condorcet paradox to nash equilibrium.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10990, 2025a.
Lin Liu, Rajarshi Mukherjee, Whitney K Newey, and James M Robins. Semiparametric efficient
empirical higher order influence function estimators. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07577, 2017.

26

Pangpang Liu, Chengchun Shi, and Will Wei Sun. Dual active learning for reinforcement learning
from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02504, 2024.
Pangpang Liu, Junwei Lu, and Will Wei Sun. Uncertainty quantification for large language model
reward learning under heterogeneous human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.03208, 2025b.
Qiang Liu, Lihong Li, Ziyang Tang, and Dengyong Zhou. Breaking the curse of horizon: Infinitehorizon off-policy estimation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
volume 31, 2018.
Zichen Liu, Changyu Chen, Wenjun Li, Penghui Qi, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Wee Sun Lee, and
Min Lin. Understanding r1-zero-like training: A critical perspective. In Second Conference on
Language Modeling, 2025c.
Nan Lu, Ethan X Fang, and Junwei Lu. Contextual online uncertainty-aware preference learning
for human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19342, 2025.
Daniel J Luckett, Eric B Laber, Anna R Kahkoska, David M Maahs, Elizabeth Mayer-Davis, and
Michael R Kosorok. Estimating dynamic treatment regimes in mobile health using v-learning.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 115(530):692, 2020.
Tao Ma, Jin Zhu, Hengrui Cai, Zhengling Qi, Yunxiao Chen, Chengchun Shi, and Eric B. Laber.
Sequential knockoffs for variable selection in reinforcement learning. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, accepted, 2025.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1928–1937. PMLR, 2016.
Rémi Munos, Michal Valko, Daniele Calandriello, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Mark Rowland,
Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Yunhao Tang, Matthieu Geist, Thomas Mesnard, Andrea Michi, et al.
Nash learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00886, 18, 2023.
Susan A Murphy. Optimal dynamic treatment regimes. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
Series B: Statistical Methodology, 65(2):331–355, 2003.
Yurii Nesterov. Introductory lectures on convex optimization: A basic course, volume 87. Springer
Science & Business Media, 2013.
Deborah Nolan and David Pollard. U-processes: Rates of convergence. The Annals of Statistics,
15(2):780–799, 1987.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages
27730–27744, 2022.
27

Lei Pang and Ruinan Jin. On the theory and practice of grpo: A trajectory-corrected approach
with fast convergence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.02833, 2025.
Cheng Qian, Emre Can Acikgoz, Qi He, Hongru WANG, Xiusi Chen, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, Gokhan
Tur, and Heng Ji. ToolRL: Reward is all tool learning needs. In The Thirty-ninth Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=eOLdGbXT6t.
Min Qian and Susan A Murphy. Performance guarantees for individualized treatment rules. Annals
of statistics, 39(2):1180, 2011.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and
Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:53728–53741, 2023.
Paria Rashidinejad, Banghua Zhu, Cong Ma, Jiantao Jiao, and Stuart Russell. Bridging offline reinforcement learning and imitation learning: A tale of pessimism. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 34:11702–11716, 2021.
Tao Ren, Jinyang Jiang, Hui Yang, Wan Tian, Minhao Zou, Guanghao Li, Zishi Zhang, Qinghao
Wang, Shentao Qin, Yanjun Zhao, Rui Tao, Hui Shao, and Yijie Peng. RiskPO: Risk-based
policy optimization with verifiable reward for LLM post-training. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=KjHB7rebQO.
Herbert Robbins and David Siegmund. A convergence theorem for non negative almost supermartingales and some applications. In Optimizing methods in statistics, pages 233–257. Elsevier,
1971.
James M Robins. Optimal structural nested models for optimal sequential decisions. In Proceedings
of the Second Seattle Symposium in Biostatistics: analysis of correlated data, pages 189–326.
Springer, 2004.
Johannes Schmidt-Hieber. Nonparametric regression using deep neural networks with relu activation function. The Annals of Statistics, 48(4):1875, 2020.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1889–1897. PMLR,
2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
Guohao Shen, Runpeng Dai, Guojun Wu, Shikai Luo, Chengchun Shi, and Hongtu Zhu. Deep
distributional learning with non-crossing quantile network. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08215,
2025.
28

Guangming Sheng, Chi Zhang, Zilingfeng Ye, Xibin Wu, Wang Zhang, Ru Zhang, Yanghua Peng,
Haibin Lin, and Chuan Wu. Hybridflow: A flexible and efficient rlhf framework. In Proceedings
of the Twentieth European Conference on Computer Systems, pages 1279–1297, 2025.
Robert P. Sherman. The limiting distribution of the maximum rank correlation estimator. Econometrica, 61(1):123–137, 1993.
Chengchun Shi. Statistical inference in reinforcement learning: A selective survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.16195, 2025.
Chengchun Shi, Alin Fan, Rui Song, and Wenbin Lu. High-dimensional a-learning for optimal
dynamic treatment regimes. Annals of statistics, 46(3):925, 2018.
Chengchun Shi, Shikai Luo, Yuan Le, Hongtu Zhu, and Rui Song. Statistically efficient advantage
learning for offline reinforcement learning in infinite horizons. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 119(545):232–245, 2024a.
Chengchun Shi, Zhengling Qi, Jianing Wang, and Fan Zhou. Value enhancement of reinforcement
learning via efficient and robust trust region optimization. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 119(547):2011–2025, 2024b.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
Rui Song, Weiwei Wang, Donglin Zeng, and Michael R Kosorok. Penalized q-learning for dynamic
treatment regimens. Statistica Sinica, 25(3):901, 2015.
Ke Sun, Yingnan Zhao, Enze Shi, Yafei Wang, Xiaodong Yan, Bei Jiang, and Linglong Kong.
Intrinsic benefits of categorical distributional loss: Uncertainty-aware regularized exploration in
reinforcement learning. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. A Bradford
Book, 2018.
Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient methods
for reinforcement learning with function approximation. In Proceedings of the 12th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1057–1063, 1999.
Adith Swaminathan and Thorsten Joachims. Batch learning from logged bandit feedback through
counterfactual risk minimization. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 16(1):1731–1755,
2015a.
Adith Swaminathan and Thorsten Joachims. The self-normalized estimator for counterfactual
learning. In advances in neural information processing systems, volume 28, 2015b.
Philip Thomas and Emma Brunskill. Data-efficient off-policy policy evaluation for reinforcement
learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2139–2148. PMLR, 2016.

29

Philip Thomas, Georgios Theocharous, and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh. High-confidence off-policy
evaluation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 29, 2015.
Anastasios A Tsiatis, Marie Davidian, Shannon T Holloway, and Eric B Laber. Dynamic treatment
regimes: Statistical methods for precision medicine. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2019.
Masatoshi Uehara and Wen Sun. Pessimistic model-based offline reinforcement learning under
partial coverage. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Masatoshi Uehara, Chengchun Shi, and Nathan Kallus. A review of off-policy evaluation in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06355, 2022.
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double qlearning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 30, 2016.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, 2017.
Milan Vojnovic and Se-Young Yun. What is the alignment objective of grpo?
arXiv:2502.18548, 2025.

arXiv preprint

Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine learning, 8(3):279–292, 1992.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
learning. Machine learning, 8(3):229–256, 1992.
Siye Wu, Jian Xie, Yikai Zhang, Aili Chen, Kai Zhang, Yu Su, and Yanghua Xiao. ARM: Adaptive
reasoning model. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2025a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=z9oeQrcNh9.
Tianhao Wu, Banghua Zhu, Ruoyu Zhang, Zhaojin Wen, Kannan Ramchandran, and Jiantao Jiao.
Pairwise proximal policy optimization: Language model alignment with comparative rl. In First
Conference on Language Modeling, 2024.
Yifan Wu, George Tucker, and Ofir Nachum. Behavior regularized offline reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.11361, 2019.
Yue Wu, Zhiqing Sun, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, Yiming Yang, and Quanquan Gu. Self-play preference optimization for language model alignment. In The Thirteenth International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.00675.
Changyi Xiao, Mengdi Zhang, and Yixin Cao. Bnpo: Beta normalization policy optimization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.02864, 2025a.
Jiancong Xiao, Ziniu Li, Xingyu Xie, Emily Getzen, Cong Fang, Qi Long, and Weijie Su. On the
algorithmic bias of aligning large language models with RLHF: Preference collapse and matching
regularization. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 120(552):2154–2164, 2025b.
30

Tengyang Xie, Yifei Ma, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Towards optimal off-policy evaluation for reinforcement learning with marginalized importance sampling. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 32, 2019.
Tengyang Xie, Ching-An Cheng, Nan Jiang, Paul Mineiro, and Alekh Agarwal. Bellman-consistent
pessimism for offline reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
34:6683–6694, 2021.
Wei Xiong, Jiarui Yao, Yuhui Xu, Bo Pang, Lei Wang, Doyen Sahoo, Junnan Li, Nan Jiang, Tong
Zhang, Caiming Xiong, et al. A minimalist approach to llm reasoning: from rejection sampling
to reinforce. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.11343, 2025.
Erhan Xu, Kai Ye, Hongyi Zhou, Luhan Zhu, Francesco Quinzan, and Chengchun Shi. Doubly
robust alignment for large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2025a.
Yixuan Even Xu, Yash Savani, Fei Fang, and J Zico Kolter. Not all rollouts are useful: Downsampling rollouts in llm reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13818, 2025b.
Zhongwen Xu and Zihan Ding. Single-stream policy optimization. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=b61UW62K7W.
Jianhao Yan, Yafu Li, Zican Hu, Zhi Wang, Ganqu Cui, Xiaoye Qu, Yu Cheng, and Yue Zhang.
Learning to reason under off-policy guidance. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=vO8LLoNWWk.
An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li,
Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang,
Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin
Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li,
Tianyi Tang, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang,
Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen2.5 technical report, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115.
Fengkai Yang, Zherui Chen, Xiaohan Wang, Xiaodong Lu, Jiajun Chai, Guojun Yin, Wei Lin,
Shuai Ma, Fuzhen Zhuang, Deqing Wang, et al. Your group-relative advantage is biased. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2601.08521, 2026.
Chaorui Yao, Yanxi Chen, Yuchang Sun, Yushuo Chen, Wenhao Zhang, Xuchen Pan, Yaliang Li,
and Bolin Ding. Group-relative REINFORCE is secretly an off-policy algorithm: Demystifying some myths about GRPO and its friends. In The Fourteenth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=7CFlXvCoN6.
Kai Ye, Hongyi Zhou, Jin Zhu, Francesco Quinzan, and Chengchun Shi. Robust reinforcement learning from human feedback for large language models fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.03784,
2025.

31

Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan, Xiaochen Zuo, Yu Yue, Weinan Dai, Tiantian
Fan, Gaohong Liu, Lingjun Liu, et al. Dapo: An open-source llm reinforcement learning system
at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14476, 2025.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Y Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea
Finn, and Tengyu Ma. Mopo: Model-based offline policy optimization. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 33:14129–14142, 2020.
Guanning Zeng, Zhaoyi Zhou, Daman Arora, and Andrea Zanette. Shrinking the variance: Shrinkage baselines for reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.03710,
2025.
Y. Zeng, G. Liu, W. Ma, N. Yang, H. Zhang, and J. Wang. Token-level direct preference optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pages 58348–58365. PMLR, 2024.
Runzhe Zhan, Yafu Li, Zhi Wang, Xiaoye Qu, Dongrui Liu, Jing Shao, Derek F. Wong, and
Yu Cheng. ExGRPO: Learning to reason from prior successes. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=701tjQXWVk.
Baqun Zhang, Anastasios A Tsiatis, Eric B Laber, and Marie Davidian. Robust estimation of
optimal dynamic treatment regimes for sequential treatment decisions. Biometrika, 100(3):681–
694, 2013.
Duzhen Zhang, Zhong-Zhi Li, Ming-Liang Zhang, Jiaxin Zhang, Zengyan Liu, Yuxuan Yao, Haotian Xu, Junhao Zheng, Xiuyi Chen, Yingying Zhang, et al. From system 1 to system 2: a survey
of reasoning large language models. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2025a.
Jixiao Zhang and Chunsheng Zuo. Grpo-lead: A difficulty-aware reinforcement learning approach
for concise mathematical reasoning in language models. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 5642–5665, 2025.
Li-Xin Zhang. Central limit theorems of a recursive stochastic algorithm with applications to
adaptive designs. Annals of applied probability: an official journal of the Institute of Mathematical
Statistics, 26(6):3630–3658, 2016.
Qingyang Zhang, Haitao Wu, Changqing Zhang, Peilin Zhao, and Yatao Bian. Right question
is already half the answer: Fully unsupervised LLM reasoning incentivization. In The Thirtyninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025b. URL https://
openreview.net/forum?id=k8Mim6RI5O.
Xiaojiang Zhang, Jinghui Wang, Zifei Cheng, Wenhao Zhuang, Zheng Lin, Minglei Zhang, Shaojie
Wang, Yinghan Cui, Chao Wang, Junyi Peng, et al. Srpo: A cross-domain implementation of
large-scale reinforcement learning on llm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.14286, 2025c.
Yuheng Zhang, Dian Yu, Baolin Peng, Linfeng Song, Ye Tian, Mingyue Huo, Nan Jiang, Haitao
Mi, and Dong Yu. Iterative nash policy optimization: Aligning LLMs with general preferences
via no-regret learning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
2025d. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Pujt3ADZgI.
32

Ying-Qi Zhao, Donglin Zeng, Eric B Laber, and Michael R Kosorok. New statistical learning
methods for estimating optimal dynamic treatment regimes. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 110(510):583–598, 2015.
Chujie Zheng, Shixuan Liu, Mingze Li, Xiong-Hui Chen, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Kai Dang,
Yuqiong Liu, Rui Men, An Yang, et al. Group sequence policy optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.18071, 2025a.
Tong Zheng, Hongming Zhang, Wenhao Yu, Xiaoyang Wang, Runpeng Dai, Rui Liu, Huiwen
Bao, Chengsong Huang, Heng Huang, and Dong Yu. Parallel-r1: Towards parallel thinking via
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.07980, 2025b.
Han Zhong, Xun Deng, Ethan X. Fang, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Runze Li. Risk-sensitive
deep rl: Variance-constrained actor-critic provably finds globally optimal policy. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, To appear, 2025.
Huiying Zhong, Zhun Deng, Weijie J. Su, Zhiwei Steven Wu, and Linjun Zhang. Provable multiparty reinforcement learning with diverse human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05006,
2024.
Fan Zhou, Jianing Wang, and Xingdong Feng. Non-crossing quantile regression for distributional
reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:15909–15919,
2020.
Wenzhuo Zhou, Ruoqing Zhu, and Annie Qu. Estimating optimal infinite horizon dynamic treatment regimes via pt-learning. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 119(545):625–638,
2024.

Appendices
A

Practical considerations

As commented in the main paper, the GRPO-type algorithm analyzed in Section 4 differs from the
implementation proposed in the original DeepSeekMath paper. To bridge this gap, we present a
more consistent formulation in Algorithm 2. There are three major differences compared to Algorithm 1: (i) reward normalization, (ii) importance sampling (IS), and (iii) KL penalty. Specifically:
(i) Reward normalization. According to (15), the advantage function A(b,g) is not simply the
difference between the reward Z (b,g) and the baseline Z̄ (b,−g) . Instead, this difference is normalized by the standard error of the within-group rewards (see (16)). Consequently, the algorithm
assigns larger weight to prompts whose rewards are more uncertain. Intuitively, when a prompt
is either too easy or too difficult, most responses receive a score of zero or achieve the maximum
score, and the normalized advantage is small. In contrast, when the level of difficulty lies in
the middle — so that some responses are correct while others are wrong — the prompt receives
large weight.

33

(ii) Importance sampling. The practical implementation includes a minibatch parameter. Whenever the minibatch size is smaller than the full batch size B, the sampled prompts are divided
into m minibatches, and the parameter is updated multiple times within each iteration (see Lines
8–10 of Algorithm 2). This is intended to improve learning efficiency: smaller minibatches lead
to more frequent parameter updates, although each update is based on less data and is therefore
noisier. Since the outputs are generated under the initial parameter θold (see Line 4), whereas
the gradient is evaluated at the current parameter θ, a distributional shift arises. To correct for
(b,g)
(b,g)
(b,g)
this mismatch, the advantage function is multiplied by an IS ratio µt
= πθ,t /πθold ,t in (14).
(b,g)

Ideally, one would instead use the sequential IS ratio up to time t, Πtk=1 µk , which yields an
unbiased correction. However, it is well known that such sequential IS ratio suffers from the
curse of horizon [Liu et al., 2018], in the sense that their variance grows exponentially fast with
t. As such, the practical algorithm uses only the token-level ratio, which substantially reduces
variance at the cost of introducing bias, as we show formally in Theorem 12. The use of the
token-level ratio is also in line with the PPO algorithm.
(iii) KL penalty. The second and third terms inside the square brackets in (14) arise from imposing
a KL penalty
κKL(πθ ∥πθref ) = κ EX∼f,Y ∼πθ (•|X) log

πθ (Y |X)
πθref (Y |X)

on the objective function, for some regularization parameter κ > 0. The purpose is to discourage
the learning policy to departure too far away from a reference policy, an idea that shares similar
spirits with the pessimistic principle in offline RL. In particular, GRPO uses Schulman’s K3
estimator3
G

i
πθref (Y (b,g) |X)
1 X h πθref (Y (b,g) |X)
−
log
−
1
G
πθ (Y (b,g) |X)
πθ (Y (b,g) |X)

(13)

g=1

P
(b,g)
(b,g)
(b,g)
for the KL divergence, which leads to the gradient estimator G−1 t ∇θ log πθ,t (1−πθ,t /πθref ,t )
in (14). When Y (g) is sampled from πθ (•|X), it is immediate that the first term inside the square
brackets of (13) has mean one, so the expectation of (13) reduces to the second term alone and
is thus unbiased for the KL divergence. The advantage of using the K3 estimator over solely the
second term (known as the K1 estimator) is that K3 achieves lower variance and is guaranteed
to be non-negative, both of which help stabilize training [Shao et al., 2024].
We begin by analyzing the gradient estimator gb(x; θ) in (14). The following lemma shows that,
due to reward normalization, this gradient estimator is not exactly a U-statistic – as the kernel
function depends on se(Z (b,•) ), which is data-dependent – but admits a U-statistic representation
asymptotically as G → ∞.
Assumption 10 (Coverage). πθ is lower bounded by ϵ for some ϵ > 0 and any θ ∈ Θ.
Conditions similar to 10 are frequently imposed in offline RL [e.g., Uehara et al., 2022].
3

http://joschu.net/blog/kl-approx.html

34

Lemma 11 (Gradient estimator asymptotically
equivalent to a U-statistic). Suppose Assumptions
q
1, 3 and 10 hold. Suppose stdX (Z) := VarZ∼πθ (•|X) (Z|X) is bounded away from zero. Then
old

gb(x; θ) converges in probability to a second-order U-statistic
 −1 X

G
gb(x; θ) =
h (Y (i) , Z (i) ), (Y (j) , Z (j) ) ,
2
1≤i<j≤G

as G → ∞, with symmetric kernel

h (Y (i) , Z (i) ), (Y (j) , Z (j) )
i
X (j)
1 h X (i) (i) X (j) (j) i Z (i) − Z (j) κ h X (i)
(j)
(i)
µt W t
(µt − 1)Wt ,
µt W t −
+
(µt − 1)Wt +
=
2 t
stdx (Z)
2 t
t
t
(g)

where Wt

(g)

(g)

= ∇θ log πθ (Yt |x, Y<t ) and the superscript (b) on Y and Z is removed for simplicity.

We next analyze the MSE of gb(x, θ), defined as MSE(b
g (x, θ)) = E[∥b
g (x; θ) − g † (x; θ)∥2 ] where
h
i
X (g)
Z (g) − Z̄ (−g)
(g)
g † (x; θ) = E µ(g) ∇θ log πθ (Y (g) |x)
+ κµ(g)
(µt − 1)Wt | X = x ,
stdx (Z)
t
Q (g)
and µ(g) denotes the sequential IS (SIS) ratio t µt . This ratio appears in the ground-truth
gradient to account for the distributional shift: the gradient is evaluated under the current policy
πθ , whereas the outcomes were generated under πθold . As discussed earlier, the practical implementation does not use the SIS ratio for gradient estimation due to its extraordinarily large variance;
(b,g)
instead, only the token-level IS ratio µt
is used to multiply the score and the advantage function.
Meanwhile, the KL divergence term does not include any IS ratio and is therefore biased as well.
Thus, bias arises from both sources. In Theorem 12 below, we characterize the MSE of the gradient
estimator, upper bounding both its squared bias and variance.
Theorem 12 (MSE upper bounds). Under Assumptions 1, 3, 10 and the same conditions in lemma
11, we have
 m2 η 2 

 κ2 m2 η 2 

 1 
trace[Σ1 (x; θ)]
+O
,
G
ϵG2

(17)

i
hX
(g) − V πθold (x)
X (g)
(g)
(g) Z
(g)
Σ1 (x; θ) = Cov
µt W t
+κ
(µt − 1)Wt |X = x .
stdx (Z)
t
t

(18)

MSE(b
g (x; θ)) = O

i+1

ϵ

+O

i+1

ϵ3

+

where

Theorem 12 gives a bias-variance decomposition regarding the gradient estimator’s MSE:
1. The first two terms on the right hand side (RHS) of (17) are bias terms that upper bound the
squared biases arising from the two sources mentioned above, respectively. Notably, these bias
terms are proportional to the learning rate ηi+1 and vanish as ηi+1 approaches zero.
2. The last two terms are variance terms. In particular, trace[Σ1 (x; θ)]/G is the leading term,
which, by its definition in (18), corresponds to the variance of an oracle estimator that knows
the value function V πθold (x) a priori.
35

3. The last term is a higher-order variance term that measures the error of the U-statistic in
approximating the oracle estimator, and is of the same order O(G−2 ) as in Theorem 2. As G
grows to infinity, this term decays to zero at a faster rate, so that the estimator achieves the
same asymptotic variance as the oracle estimator.
Finally, we establish the consistency of the estimated policy parameter θbn .
Proposition 13. Suppose the reward signal Z is binary and the value function V πθ is bounded
away from 0 and 1. Then under Assumptions 1, 3, 4, 5(b) and 6, we have
P
e ∗) →
d(θbn , Θ
0,

e ∗ = arg maxθ J (θ) and
where Θ
h
p
i
J (θ) = E 2 arcsin
V πθ (X) − κ KL(πθ ∥πθref ).

(19)

We make a few remarks. First, we adopt the same asymptotic framework as in Section 4 for
establishing consistency, by allowing multiple optimizers to exist and by letting n → ∞ while fixing
all other parameters such as B, G, κ, m and ϵ. Second, consider the case where κ = 0, so that the
KL penalty is not imposed. Interestingly, according to (19), the policy parameter does not directly
maximize the value function
p but rather an arcsin transformation of it. To see why, note that when
Z is binary, stdx (Z) = V πθold (x)[1 − V πθold (x)]. Under the stated conditions, we can show that
the ground-truth gradient
p
h
h
i
V πθ (X) i
Z
(g)
(g)
(g)
g † (θ) = E[g † (X; θ)] = Eπθ Wt
→ Eπθ ∇θ log πθ (Yt |X, Y<t ) p
,
stdx (Z)
1 − V πθold (X)
which is precisely the derivative of J (θ) in (19). This arises from reward normalization. This
relationship was identified by Davis and Recht [2025], who did not consider the use of minibatches
or KL penalties. Nor did they establish parameter consistency. We formally verify their result by
establishing parameter consistency under more practical settings.
To conclude this section, we remark that although we aim to match practical settings as closely
as possible, two gaps remain: (i) the original GRPO uses length normalization, which further
divides each advantage function A(b,g) by the length of Y (g) , although this is not used in later
variants such as Dr. GRPO and GPG; (ii) simple stochastic gradient descent algorithm is no longer
used in practice, and has been replaced by more sophisticated optimizers such as Muon [Jordan
et al., 2024]. We leave these gaps for future research.

B

Proofs

B.1

Group relative gradient evaluation

In this section, we provide the proofs of Lemma 1, Theorem 2, Proposition 3, and Corollaries 4 and
5 stated in Section 4.1.
Proof of Lemma 1: To ease notation, we denote W (g) = ∇θ log πθ (Y (g) |x). As discussed below
Lemma 1, by setting C (g) in (5) to the leave-one-out group mean baseline, each individual term in
the sum satisfies
1 X (g) (g)
W (g) [Z (g) − Z̄ (−g) ] =
W [Z − Z (k) ].
G−1
k̸=g

36

By definition, we obtain
gbGRPO (x; θ) =

X
1
W (g) [Z (g) − Z (k) ].
G(G − 1)
k̸=g

Applying a standard symmetrization argument, it follows that
gbGRPO (x; θ) =

X
X
1
1
W (g) [Z (g) − Z (k) ] +
W (k) [Z (k) − Z (g) ]
2G(G − 1)
2G(G − 1)
k̸=g

k̸=g

=

X
1
[W (g) Z (g) − W (g) Z (k) − W (k) Z (g) + W (k) Z (k) ]
2G(G − 1)

=

1
2G(G − 1)

=

X

1
h (Y (k) , Z (k) ), (Y (g) , Z (g) ) .
2G(G − 1)

k̸=g

X

[(W (g) − W (k) )(Z (g) − Z (k) )]

k̸=g

k̸=g

The conclusion of Lemma 1 thus follows.
Proof of Theorem 2: Recall that the Hoeffding decomposition (2) expresses a U-statistic as the sum
of the expectation of the kernel h0 , a first-order component,
n

n

i=1

i=1


1X
2 X
ζ1 (Xi ) =
h1 (Xi ) − h0 ,
n
n
and a second-order component
X
X

1
1
ζ2 (Xi , Xj ) =
h(Xi , Xj ) − h1 (Xi ) − h1 (Xj ) + h0 .
n(n − 1)
n(n − 1)
i̸=j

i̸=j

With some calculations, it is straightforward to show that
(i) Each of ζ1 (Xi ) and ζ2 (Xi , Xj ) has mean zero and is therefore orthogonal (i.e., uncorrelated)
to h0 ;
(ii) The first-order term ζ1 (Xi ) is orthogonal to the second-order term ζ2 (Xk , Xg ) for any i, k, g;
(iii) Different first-order and second-order terms are mutually orthogonal, i.e., ζ1 (Xi ) ⊥ ζ1 (Xj )
for i ̸= j, and ζ2 (Xi , Xj ) ⊥ ζ2 (Xk , Xg ) whenever {i, j} ̸= {k, g}.
These orthogonality relations lead to the following MSE decomposition for the U -statistic:
MSE(U ) =

n


1 X
4
trace Var ζ1 (Xi ) + 2
2
n
n (n − 1)2
i=1

=

X



trace Var ζ2 (Xi , Xj )

1≤i<j≤n





1
2
trace Var ζ1 (X1 ) +
trace Var ζ2 (X1 , X2 ) .
n
n(n − 1)

37

Next, by Jensen’s inequality,


2
trace Var ζ2 (X1 , X2 ) = E h(X1 , X2 ) − E[h(X1 , X2 ) | X1 ] − E[h(X2 , X1 ) | X2 ] + Eh(X1 , X2 )
≤ 4 E∥h(X1 , X2 )∥2 + 4 E E[h(X1 , X2 ) | X1 ]
+ 4 E E[h(X2 , X1 ) | X2 ]

2

2

+ 4 ∥Eh(X1 , X2 )∥2

≤ 16 E∥h(X1 , X2 )∥2 .
It follows that


 O E∥h(X1 , X2 )∥2
1
MSE(U ) = trace Var ζ1 (X1 ) +
.
n
n(n − 1)

(20)

By setting U to the GRPO gradient estimator gbGRPO (θ; x), it is immediate to see that the first-order
component becomes the oracle gradient estimator so that




trace Var ζ1 (X1 ) = trace Σoracle (x; θ) .
(21)
Additionally, under the boundedness assumption 1, we obtain


E∥W (1) − W (2) ∥2 (Z (1) − Z (2) )2 = O E∥W (1) − W (2) ∥2 = O E∥W ∥2 ,

(22)

where the last equality follows from the fact that for any random vectors X and Y , E∥X + Y ∥2 ≤
2(E∥X∥2 + E∥Y ∥2 ). Combining (22) with (20) and (21), we have


1
E∥∇θ log πθ (Y |x)∥2
MSE(b
gGRPO (x; θ)) = trace[Σoracle (x; θ)] + O
.
G
G2
This completes the proof of Theorem 2.
Proof of Proposition 3. By definition, MSE(b
gGRPO (θ)) equals
E∥b
gGRPO (θ) − g(θ)∥2
B

2

B

1 X
1 X
= E
[b
gGRPO (X (b) ; θ) − g(X (b) ; θ)] +
[g(X (b) ; θ) − g(θ)]
B
B
b=1

.

b=1

Since g(X (b) ; θ) equals the conditional mean of gbGRPO (X (b) ; θ) given X (b) , gbGRPO (X (b) ; θ)−g(X (b) ; θ)
is orthogonal to g(X (b) ; θ) − g(θ). It follows that
2

B

1 X
MSE(b
gGRPO (θ)) = E
[b
gGRPO (X (b) ; θ) − g(X (b) ; θ)]
B
b=1

B

2

1 X
+E
[g(X (b) ; θ) − g(θ)]
B
b=1

1
1
= E ∥b
gGRPO (X; θ) − g(X; θ)∥2 + E ∥g(X; θ) − g(θ)∥2 .
B
B
Applying the conclusion of Theorem 2, we obtain
E∥b
gGRPO (θ) − g(θ)∥2 =

E ∥g(X; θ) − g(θ)∥2
B


trace[Σoracle (θ)]
E∥∇θ log πθ (Y |X)∥2
+O
.
+
BG
BG2

This completes the proof of Proposition 3.
38

Proof of Corollary 4. The conclusion directly follows from Theorem 2 and Proposition 3 by letting
G → ∞.
Proof of Corollary 5. Any gradient estimator gb(x; θ) whose baseline term b(x) is a function of the
prompt x only is an unbiased estimator of g(x; θ). Therefore, its MSE can be represented as:


MSE(b
g (θ; x)) = trace Var(b
g (θ; x)) = E∥b
g (θ; x)∥2 − ∥g(θ; x)∥2 .
(23)
The first term on the RHS can be further decomposed as
1 
E ∥∇θ log πθ (Y |x)∥2 [Z − V πθ (x) + V πθ (x) − b(x)]2
G
1 
= E ∥∇θ log πθ (Y |x)∥2 [Z − V πθ (x)]2
G
1 
+ E ∥∇θ log πθ (Y |x)∥2 [V πθ (x) − b(x)]2
G
1 
+ E ∥∇θ log πθ (Y |x)∥2 [V πθ (x) − b(x)][Z − V πθ (x)] .
G

E∥b
g (θ; x)∥2 =

(24)

Notice that the second line of (24) equals trace[Σoracle (x; θ)]. Under Assumption 2 that Z and
∥∇θ log πθ (Y |x)∥ are conditionally independent given x, the interaction term (i.e., the last line of
(24)) equals zero. This together with (23) and (24) yields that
1
1 
trace[Σoracle (x; θ)] + E ∥∇θ log πθ (Y |x)∥2 [V πθ (x) − b(x)]2
G
G
1
≥ trace[Σoracle (x; θ)].
G

MSE(b
g (x; θ)) =

(25)

Since Corollary 4 implies MSEA (b
gGRPO (x; θ)) = G−1 trace[Σoracle (x; θ)], we obtain
MSEA (b
gGRPO (x; θ)) ≤ MSE(b
g (x; θ)).
Moreover, when the baseline term b(x) ≡ 0, the above inequality becomes strict given that V πθ (x) ̸=
0 and ∇θ log πθ (Y |x) is notPalmost surely zero.
Next, consider gb(θ) = b gb(X (b) ; θ)/B in the minibatch setting. Following a similar argument
to the proof of Proposition 3, we obtain
E∥b
g (θ) − g(θ)∥2 =

E ∥g(X; θ) − g(θ)∥2
1
+ E∥b
g (X; θ) − g(X; θ)∥2 .
B
B

Applying inequality (25), we obtain
MSE(b
g (θ)) ≥

E ∥g(X; θ) − g(θ)∥2
1
+
trace[Σoracle (θ)] = MSEA (b
gGRPO (θ)).
B
BG

For a zero baseline function, the above inequality becomes strict given that V πθ (X) and ∇θ log πθ (Y |X)
are not almost surely zero. This completes the proof of Corollary 5.

39

B.2

Group relative policy optimization

This section presents the proofs of Lemma 6, Theorems 7 and 8, and Corollaries 9 and 10.
Proof of Lemma 6. Let J(θ) = Eπθ (Z) denote our objective function defined on θ ∈ Θ. Its gradient
is given by ∇θ J(θ) = g(θ) Recall that the parameter is updated according to θn+1 = θn + ηn gb(θn ).
Under the L-smoothness condition (Assumption 3), we have
1
J(θn+1 ) = J(θn + ηn gb(θn )) ≥ J(θn ) + ηn g ⊤ (θn )b
g (θn ) − Lηn2 ∥b
g (θn )∥2 .
2
Notice that gb(θ) is unbiased to g(θ). Conditioned on θn and take conditional expectation on both
sides, we obtain


1
g (θn )∥2 |θn .
(26)
E[J(θn+1 )|θn ] ≥ J(θn ) + ηn ∥g(θn )∥2 − Lηn2 E ∥b
2


The last term on the RHS can be represented by −Lηn2 MSE(b
g (θn )) + ∥g(θn )∥2 /2. Let θ∗ be a
maximizer of J(θ). Then, rearranging the terms in (26) yields:
J(θ∗ ) − E[J(θn+1 )|θn ] ≤ J(θ∗ ) − J(θn ) − ηn ∥g(θn )∥2
1
1
+ Lηn2 ∥g(θn )∥2 + Lηn2 MSE(b
gn (θn )).
2
2
It follows that


Lηn2
Lηn2
E[∆(πθn+1 )|θn ] ≤ ∆(πθn ) − ηn −
∥g(θn )∥2 +
MSE(b
g (θn ))
2
2
Under the PL condition (Assumption 4), we obtain

1
E[∆(πθn+1 )|θn ] ≤ 1 − 2µηn + µLηn2 ∆(πθn ) + Lηn2 M,
2

(27)

where M denotes the uniform upper bound of the MSEs.
Based on this inequality, we derive suboptimality gap bounds for the two learning-rate schedules
separately, as follows.
(i) The constant schedule. Under the constant schedule where ηi = β, (27) becomes

1
E[∆(πθn+1 )|θn ] ≤ 1 − 2µβ + µLβ 2 ∆(πθn ) + Lβ 2 M.
2

(28)

By Lemma 16 in Section B.4, we have µ ≤ L. Consider the quadratic equation 1 − 2µβ + µLβ 2 = 0
with β treated as the variable. Its discriminant equals µ2 − 4µL ≤ 0 so that the equation has at
most one real solution. As such, we have ρ := 1 − 2µβ + µLβ 2 ≥ 0. Additionally, since β < (2L)−1
(Assumption 5(a)), ρ is strictly smaller than 1.
Taking expectations on both sides of (28) with respect to θn and unrolling the recursion yields
n

X
1
Lβ 2 M
E[∆(πθn+1 )] ≤ ρ E[∆(πθ0 )] + Lβ 2 M
ρk−1 = ρn E[∆(πθ0 )] +
.
2
2(1 − ρ)
n

k=1

This completes the proof under the constant schedule.
40

(ii) The 1/i schedule. When ηi = β/i for some constant β, (27) becomes


Lβ 2 M
2µβ µLβ 2
∆(π
)
+
E[∆(πθn+1 )|θn ] ≤ 1 −
+
.
θ
n
n
n2
2n2
Taking expectation on both sides yields


2µβ µLβ 2
Lβ 2 M
E[∆(πθn+1 )] ≤ 1 −
E[∆(π
)]
+
+
.
θ
n
n
n2
2n2
To this end, we apply Lemma 14 (Section B.4) by letting an = E[∆(πθn )], A = 2µβ, B = µLβ 2 and
C = 12 Lβ 2 M . Since β > (2µ)−1 , we have A > 1. Notice that the sequence an is bounded under
Assumption 1. Therefore, lemma 14 implies that for any constant ε > 0,


(1 + ε)Lβ 2 M c
,
E[∆(πθn )] ≤ max
(4µβ − 2)n n
holds for all n ≥ 1, where c is a constant only depends on µ, β, L and ε. This finishes the proof of
Lemma 6.
Proof of Theorem 7. According to Lemma 6, the sub-optimality upper bounds depend on supθ MSE(b
g (θ))/n.
By Proposition 3, we know that for GRPO-type algorithm,
sup MSE(b
g (θ)) ≤
θ

c1
c2
c3
+
+
,
B
BG BG2

(29)

where c1 = supθ E∥g(X; θ)−g(θ)∥22 , c2 = supθ trace[Σoracle (θ)] and c3 = O(supθ E∥∇θ log πθ (Y |X)∥2 ).
Under a fixed sampling budget N = BG per iteration, the RHS becomes
c1 G c2
c3
c2
2√
+
+
≥
+
c1 c3 ,
N
N
NG
N
N
where the inequality follows from that a2 + b2 ≥ 2ab, and the equality holds if and only if G =
p
c3 /c1 . Similarly, under a fixed total sampling budget N = nBG, the MSE is upper bounded by
c3 n
c2 n
2√
c1 nG c2 n
+
+
≥
+
c1 c3 n.
N
N
NG
N
N
p
Again, the the equality holds if and only if G = c3 /c1 .
Proof of Theorem 8. We first prove consistency. For any θ1 , θ2 ∈ Θ, the distance function satisfies
d(θ1 , Θ∗ ) − d(θ2 , Θ∗ ) ≤ ∥θ1 − θ2 ∥,
and is therefore continuous in θ. Hence, for any ε > 0, the level set
Nε := {θ ∈ Θ : d(θ, Θ∗ ) ≥ ε}
is closed. Under the compactness assumption of Θ in Assumption 6, Nε is compact as well. Combined with the continuity of the policy learning objective J (implied by Assumption 3), we obtain
that the supremum supθ∈Nε J(θ) is attainable at some θε ∈ Nε .
41

Since θε ∈
/ Θ∗ , we have δε := J ∗ − J(θε ) > 0. Therefore,


P d(θn , Θ∗ ) ≥ ε ≤ P ∆(πθn ) ≥ δε .
Applying Markov’s inequality and invoking Lemma 6, we obtain


 E ∆(πθn )
c̄
∗
≤
→0
P d(θn , Θ ) ≥ ε ≤
δε
nδε

as n → ∞,

where c̄ is a positive constant depending on (β, µ, L, M, ε). Thus,
P

d(θn , Θ∗ ) −
→ 0,
which establishes the consistency of θn .
Next, we derive the asymptotic distribution of ∆(πθn ). The proof proceeds in four steps:
a.s.

• Step (i): We strengthen consistency to almost sure convergence, i.e., d(θn , Θ∗ ) → 0.
• Step (ii): We derive the convergence rate of θn by showing that E[d2 (θn , Θ∗ )] = O(n−1 ).
• Step (iii): We establish the asymptotic normality of the identifiable part of θn , Q⊤ θn .
• Step (iv): We derive the asymptotic distribution of ∆(πθn ).
Step (i): Almost sure convergence. To prove this result, recall the inequality established in
equation (27):

1
E[∆(πθn+1 )|θn ] ≤ 1 − 2µηn + µLηn2 ∆(πθn ) + Lηn2 M,
2
where ηn = β/n. We apply the Robbins-Siegmund theorem (see Lemma 17) by setting Vn = ∆(πθn ),
An = µLηn2 , Bn = 12 Lηn2 M and Cn = 2µηn Vn . It is immediate to see that
∞
X

and

An =

∞
X
µLβ 2

n2

n=1

n=1

∞
X

∞
X
LM β 2

n=1

Bn =

n=1

2n2

<∞

< ∞.

By the Robbins-Siegmund theorem, it follows that Vn = ∆(πθn ) converges to some random variable
V∞ almost surely.
Additionally, by the suboptimality gap bound established in Lemma 6, an application of Fatou’s
lemma yields
EV∞ ≤ lim inf E∆(πθn ) ≤ lim inf c∗ /n = 0,
n

n

for some constant c∗ > 0. Since V

∞ is non-negative, it follows that V∞ = 0 almost surely. Consequently, ∆(πθn ) → 0 almost surely. This implies for any δ > 0,

P ({∆(πθn ) ≥ δ, i.o.}) = 0,

42

where {An , i.o.} represents the event that An occurs infinitely often. Using the same argument as
in the proof of consistency of θn , we obtain for any ε > 0 that,
P ({d(θn , Θ∗ ) ≥ ε, i.o.}) ≤ P ({∆(πθn ) ≥ δε , i.o.}) = 0.
This establishes the almost sure convergence of θn .
Step (ii): Convergence rate of θn : Recall that the projection operator ΠΘ∗ is defined as:
ΠΘ∗ (θ) := arg min∗ d(θ, x).
x∈Θ

Since Θ∗ is closed and convex (Assumption 7), the projection operator is well-defined. It follows
from its definition that
d2 (θn+1 , Θ∗ ) ≤ ∥θn+1 − ΠΘ∗ (θn )∥2 .
According to the update rule θn+1 = θn + ηn gb(θn ), we have
d2 (θn+1 , Θ∗ ) ≤ ∥θn + ηn gb(θn ) − ΠΘ∗ (θn )∥2

= d2 (θn , Θ∗ ) + 2ηn gb(θn )⊤ (θn − ΠΘ∗ (θn )) + ηn2 ∥b
g (θn )∥2 .

Taking conditional expectation with respect to θn on both sides yields


E[d2 (θn+1 , Θ∗ )|θn ] ≤ d2 (θn , Θ∗ ) + 2ηn g ⊤ (θn )(θn − ΠΘ∗ (θn )) + ηn2 E ∥b
g (θn )∥2 |θn


= d2 (θn , Θ∗ ) + 2ηn g ⊤ (θn )(θn − ΠΘ∗ (θn )) + ηn2 MSE(b
g (θn )) + ∥g(θn )∥2 .

(30)

Under L-smoothness (Assumption 3) and weak strong concavity (Assumption 9), we have
∥g(θn )∥2 = ∥g(θn ) − g(ΠΘ∗ (θn ))∥2 ≤ L2 ∥θn − ΠΘ∗ (θn )∥2 = L2 d2 (θn , Θ∗ ),
and
g ⊤ (θn )(θn − ΠΘ∗ (θn )) ≤ −µd2 (θn , Θ∗ ).
Setting ηn = β/n, and combining these inequalities with (30) yields


β2M
2µβ L2 β 2
2
∗
+ 2
E[d2 (θn , Θ∗ )] + 2 .
E[d (θn+1 , Θ )] ≤ 1 −
n
n
n
Under the assumption that β > (2µ)−1 , we can apply Lemma 14 again to obtain
E[d2 (θn , Θ∗ )] = O(n−1 ).
This establishes the desired convergence rate of θn .
Step (iii) Asymptotic normality of Q⊤ θn : In overparameterized models such as LLMs, the
entire parameter vector is not asymptotically normal because it is not fully identifiable. To address
this, we decompose the parameter into its identifiable and non-identifiable components. Specifically,
the matrix Q introduced in Assumption 7 forms an orthonormal basis for the identifiable subspace.
Without loss of generality, we assume the Hessian matrix H ∗ in Assumption 7 is a diagonal
matrix diag(−λ1 , . . . , −λr ), where λ1 , · · · , λr are the r positive eigenvalues of −H ∗ . Indeed,
since H(θ∗ ) is symmetric, so is H ∗ . As such, there exists an orthogonal matrix P such that
43

P ⊤ H ∗ P = diag(−λ1 , . . . , −λr ). Consequently, we can replace H ∗ and the projection matrix Q
e denote an orthogonal
by P ⊤ H ∗ P (which is diagonal) and QP ⊤ , respectively. Let Q̄ = (Q, Q)
completion of Q so that Q̄ is a d × d orthogonal matrix and
Q̄⊤ H(θ∗ )Q̄ = diag(−λ1 , . . . , −λr , 0 . . . , 0).

(31)

By Lemma 15, the set Q⊤ Θ∗ = {Q⊤ θ : θ ∈ Θ∗ } consists of a single point, which we denote by v ∗ .
We aim to establish the asymptotic normality of Q⊤ θn − v ∗ in this step.
Let γn = Q̄⊤ θn . Then γn satisfies the recursion

γn+1 = γn + ηn Q̄⊤ g(Q̄γn ) + ηn Q̄⊤ gb(θn ) − g(θn ) .
(32)
Let vn = Q⊤ θn denote the first r components of γn (the identifiable component), and let un denote
the remaining d − r components (the non-identifiable component), where d is the dimension of θ.
Then

e n ) + ηn Q⊤ gb(θn ) − g(θn )
vn+1 = vn + ηn Q⊤ g(Qvn + Qu
(33)
h(vn , un ) ∆Mn+1
+
,
= vn +
n
n
where
e
h(v, u) = βQ⊤ g(Qv + Qu),


∆Mn+1 = βQ⊤ gb(θn ) − g(θn )

is a martingale difference satisfying E(∆Mn+1 | θn ) = 0.
We aim to apply central limit theorems (CLTs) for stochastic approximation [e.g., Zhang, 2016,
Proposition B.2] to establish the asymptotic normality of vn . To invoke this CLT (see Lemma 18),
we need to represent vn in the form

Σ + o(1) 
en+1
vn+1 − v ∗ = Ir −
(vn − v ∗ ) +
,
n
n
for some martingale difference sequence {en }. Comparing with (33), we can set en+1 to ∆Mn+1 .
It remains to show that
h(vn , un ) = −H(vn − v ∗ ) + o(∥vn − v ∗ ∥),
(34)
for some deterministic matrix H.
Nonetheless, it remains challenging to prove (34). Although the orthogonal transformation
isolates the identifiable component, the update still depends on the full parameter vector. Consequently, the recursion for vn involves not only vn but also the non-identifiable component un , as
reflected in (33). However, (34) requires to approximate h(vn , un ) using only vn . While this may
seem impossible at first glance, we show below that it can be achieved under the WSC condition
(Assumption 9) by setting H = −βH ∗ .
Let u∗n denote the projection of the non-identifiable component un onto Θ∗ , defined through
the following sequence of mappings:
un 7→ θn 7→ θn∗ 7→ γn∗ 7→ u∗n .
⊤
∗
Specifically, recall that θn = Q̄γn = Q̄(vn⊤ , u⊤
n ) . Let θn = ΠΘ∗ (θn ) denote the projection of θn onto
⊤
∗
∗
Θ∗ , and define γn∗ = Q̄⊤ θn∗ . We decompose γn∗ as γn∗ = (v ∗⊤ , u∗⊤
n ) , where v and un correspond to
∗
the first r and last d − r components of γn , respectively.

44

Note that by Lemma 15, v ∗ is unique and does not depend on n, whereas u∗n may vary with n.
By definition, we have h(v ∗ , u∗n ) = 0. It follows from Taylor’s theorem that
e n ) − g(Qv ∗ + Qu
e ∗n )]
h(vn , un ) = h(vn , un ) − h(v ∗ , u∗n ) = βQ⊤ [g(Qvn + Qu
= βQ⊤ H(θ∗ )[Q(vn − v ∗ ) + e
Q(un − u∗n )] + o(∥Q(vn − v ∗ )∥ + ∥ e
Q(un − u∗n )∥),
where the first term on the second line equals βQ⊤ H(θ∗ )Q(vn − v ∗ ) = βH ∗ (vn − v ∗ ) by (31).
Moreover, the second term = o(∥vn − v ∗ ∥ + ∥un − u∗n ∥), and somewhat surprisingly, this term
further simplifies to o(∥vn − v ∗ ∥) under the WSC condition (Assumption 9), as we show below.
Under Assumption 9, we have


µ ∥vn − v ∗ ∥2 + ∥un − u∗ ∥2 ≤ g ⊤ (Qγn )Q̄(γn∗ − γn ).
Applying Taylor’s theorem again, the RHS becomes
−(γn − γn∗ )⊤ Q⊤ HQ(γn − γn∗ ) + o(∥γn − γn∗ ∥2 ) = −

r
X

λk (vnk − vk∗ )2 + o(∥γn − γn∗ ∥2 ).

k=1

Consequently, we have for sufficiently large n that
r
X

(ϵ − λk − µ)(vnk − vk∗ )2 ≥ (µ − ϵ)∥un − u∗ ∥2 ,

k=1

for some ϵ < µ. This leads to ∥un − u∗ ∥ = O(∥vn − v ∗ ∥).
To summarize, we have shown that
h(vn , un ) = βH ∗ (vn − v ∗ ) + o(∥vn − v ∗ ∥).
This proves (34) with Σ = −βH ∗ . Define

∗
∗
∗ ⊤
−βH ∗ − [h(vn , un ) − βH (vn − v )](vn − v ) ,
∥vn − v ∗ ∥2
Hn =

∗
−βH ,

(35)

if (vn , un ) ∈
/ Q̄⊤ Θ∗ ,
if (vn , un ) ∈ Q̄⊤ Θ∗ .

It follows from (35) that Hn is well-defined and satisfies Hn → −βH ∗ almost surely, given the
almost sure convergence of the estimated parameters.
Additionally, we have h(vn , un ) = Hn (vn − v ∗ ) by definition. This together with (33) leads to


Hn
∆Mn+1
∗
vn+1 − v = Ir −
(vn − v ∗ ) +
.
n
n
Based on this equation, according to Lemma 18, it remains to verify the following conditions to
establish the CLT:
(i) The smallest eigenvalue of the limit of Hn , i.e., −βH ∗ , should be larger than 1/2.
(ii) The Lindeberg condition for martingale differences: for any ϵ > 0,
n
√
1X
E[∥∆Mi ∥2 I{∥∆Mi ∥ ≥ ϵ n|Fi−1 ] → 0 a.s.,
n
i=1

where Fi denotes the filtration generated by the martingale process.
45

(iii) Convergence of the quadratic variation:
n
i
1X h
E (∆Mi )(∆Mi )⊤ |Fi−1 → Ω
n

a.s.,

i=1

for some symmetric positive semidefinite (random) matrix Ω.
To verify Condition (i), notice that by Lemma 16, the smallest eigenvalue of −H ∗ is lower bounded
by µ. Condition (i) thus holds under the assumption that β > (2µ)−1 (Assumption 5). Condition
(ii) follows from the bounded reward assumption (Assumption 1) and the bounded score assumption
(Assumption 3), which together imply the boundedness of ∇Mi . Condition (iii) is directly implied
by Assumption 8, with Ω = Q⊤ ΓQ. Applying Lemma 18, we obtain
d

vn → N (0, Σ),
where

Z ∞
Σ=

∗

1

∗

1

(e−(−βH − 2 Ir )u )⊤ Q⊤ ΓQe−(−βH − 2 Ir )u du.

0

This completes the proof of this step.
Step (iv) Asymptotic distribution of ∆(πθn ): Finally, we derive the asymptotic distribution
of ∆(πθn ). Recall that θn∗ = arg minθ∈Θ∗ d(θn , θ). It follows from Taylor’s theorem that
∆(πθn ) = −[J(θn ) − J(θn∗ )]
1
= − (θn − θn∗ )⊤ H(θn∗ )(θn − θn∗ ) + o(∥θn − θn∗ ∥2 )
2
1
= − (θn − θn∗ )⊤ H(θn∗ )(θn − θn∗ ) + op (n−1 ),
2
where the last equation follows from the rate of convergence derived in Step (ii).
Consider the leading term on the RHS. Notice that
(θn − θn∗ )⊤ H(θn∗ )(θn − θn∗ )
= (θn − θn∗ )⊤ Q̄H ∗ Q̄⊤ (θn − θn∗ )
= −(vn − v ∗ )⊤ diag(λ1 , . . . , λr )(vn − v ∗ )
Combining this with the asymptotic normality
obtain

√
d
n(vn − v ∗ ) → N (0, Σ) established in Step (iii), we
d

n∆(πθn ) →

r
X

wk χ21,k

k=1

where wk are eigenvalues of 12 Σ1/2 diag(λ1 , . . . , λr )Σ1/2 . This completes the proof of Theorem 8.
Proof of Corollary 9: Under Assumption 3, the policy score ∇θ log πθ is both continuous (as a function of θ) and uniformly bounded. This together with the bounded reward assumption (Assumption 1) enables us to invoke the dominated convergence theorem to show that |Ω(θn ) − Ω(θn∗ )| → 0
whenever d(θn , Θ∗ ) → 0, where we recall θn∗ = ΠΘ∗ (θn ). By assumption, Ω(θ∗ ) depends on θ∗ only
through Q⊤ θ∗ = v ∗ , which is unique and invariant over Θ∗ by Lemma 15. Fixing any θ∗ ∈ Θ∗ , we
thus obtain Ω(θn ) → Ω(θ∗ ), which under Assumption 8 yields Q⊤ ΓQ = Ω(θ∗ ).
46

Using the same calculations as in the proof of Proposition 3, we have
Cov(b
gGRPO (θ∗ )) − Cov(b
goracle (θ∗ )) = O(G−2 ).
Consequently, the same order of magnitude holds for ΩGRPO (θ∗ ) − Ωoracle (θ∗ ), and hence for
Q⊤ (ΓGRPO − Γoracle )Q, where Γoracle and ΓGRPO denote the matrices Γ in Assumption 8 under
the oracle and GRPO algorithms, respectively.
It follows that ΣGRPO − Σoracle = O(G−2 ), where ΣGRPO and Σoracle denote the asymptotic
covariance matrices of Q⊤ θbn,GRPO and Q⊤ θbn,oracle defined in Step (iii) of the proof of Theorem 8.
Now, define
1
∗
(θ∗ )H ∗ Σ1/2
a ∈ {GRPO, oracle}.
Wa := − Σ1/2
a (θ ),
2 a
By assumption, both ΩGRPO (θ∗ ) and Ωoracle (θ∗ ) are positive definite. So are Σoracle and ΣGRPO .
Therefore, the matrix square-root map is locally Lipschitz so that

1/2
1/2
ΣGRPO − Σoracle = O ΣGRPO − Σoracle = O(G−2 ).
Hence, it follows from the negative definiteness of H ∗ (Assumption 7) that

1  1/2
1/2
1/2
1/2
WGRPO − Woracle =
ΣGRPO (−H ∗ )ΣGRPO − Σoracle (−H ∗ )Σoracle
2
i
1 h 1/2
1/2 
1/2
1/2
1/2
1/2 
=
ΣGRPO − Σoracle (−H ∗ )ΣGRPO + Σoracle (−H ∗ ) ΣGRPO − Σoracle ,
2
if of the order O(G−2 ) as well.
By Weyl’s inequality,
|wk,GRPO − wk,oracle | ≤ ∥WGRPO − Woracle ∥,

k = 1, . . . , r.

Therefore,
wk,GRPO − wk,oracle = O(G−2 ).
The proof is hence completed.
Proof of Corollary 10: Using the same calculations as in the proof of Corollary 5, we can show
that Ωoracle (θ∗ ) ⪯ Ω(θ∗ ) in the positive semidefinite order, under the conditional uncorrelation
assumption in Corollary 10, where Ω(θ∗ ) denotes the projected covariance matrix Cov(b
g (θ∗ )) for a
given meta-algorithm whose baseline is a function of X only. The remainder of the proof follows
very similarly to that of Corollary 9.

B.3

Practical considerations

This section presents the proofs of Lemma 11, Theorem 12 and Proposition 13.
P

Proof of Lemma 11. By the law of large numbers, se(Z) → stdx (Z) as G → ∞. Under the assumption that stdx (Z) is bounded away from zero, it follows from the continuous mapping theorem that
P

1/se(Z) → 1/stdx (Z). Under the bounded reward assumption (Assumption 1), the bounded score
assumption (Assumption 3) and the coverage assumption (Assumption 10), it follows from that the
gradient estimator is asymptotically equivalent to a version with se(Z (•) ) replaced by std(Z), as
G → ∞. Following arguments similar to those in the proof of Lemma 1, this version is a U-statistic
with the kernel function given in Lemma 11. This completes the proof.
47

Proof of Theorem 12. According to the bias-variance decomposition, we have
MSE(b
g (x; θ)) = ∥b(x; θ)∥2 + trace(Var(b
g (x; θ)),
where b(x; θ) := E[b
g (x; θ)] − g † (x; θ).
Following similar arguments to those in the proof of Theorem 2, we can derive that
 1 
trace[Σ1 (x; θ)]
trace(Var(b
g † (x; θ)) =
+O
.
G
ϵG2
It remains to upper bound the squared bias term. Notice that the bias can be represented by
i
h
(g) − Z̄ (−g) i
X h (g)
X (g)
(g) Z
(g)
E (µt − µ(g) )Wt
(µt − 1)Wt .
b(x; θ) =
+ κE (1 − µ(g) )
std(Z)
t
t
Since ∇θ πθ = πθ ∇ log πθ , it follows from the bounded score condition in Assumption 3 that πθ is
Lipchitz continuous as a function of θ. Under Assumptions 1, 3 and 10, the gradient gb is bounded.
As such,
πθ − πθold = O(∥θ − θold ∥) = O(mηi+1 ).
This together with the coverage assumption yields


 (π (Y (g) |x, Y (g) ) − π (Y (i) |x, Y (i) ))2 
θ t
θold t
(g)
<t
<t
Eπθold |µt − 1|2 = Eπθold
(i)
(i)


π 2 (Y |x, Y )
θold

≤

t

(36)

(37)

<t

 m2 η 2 
2
cm2 ηi+1
(i)
(i)
i+1
Eπθold [πθ−1
(Y
|x,
Y
)]
=
O
,
t
<t
old
ϵ
ϵ

(38)

for some constant c > 0.
Following a similar argument, we have
Eπθold |µ(g) − 1|2 = O

 m2 η 2 
i+1

ϵ

.

It follows the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality that
h (g) − Z̄ (−g)
n
io 2
X
(g) Z
(g)
b2 (x; θ) ≤2
Eπθold (1 − µ(g) )Wt
+ κ(µt − 1)
stdx (Z)
t
h
(g) − Z̄ (−g) i 2
X
(g)
(g) Z
+2
Eπθold (1 − µt )Wt
stdx (Z)
t
 κ2

X

(g)
=O 2 Eπθold |µ(g) − 1|2 + O
Eπθold |µt − 1|2 ,
ϵ
t

(39)

(40)

where the last equality holds under the bounded reward assumption (Assumption 1), the bounded
score assumption (Assumption 3), the coverage assumption (Assumption 10) and that stdX (Z) is
uniformly bounded away from 0.
Combining (37) – (40), we obtain
i m2 η 2 
h κ2
i+1
+
1
.
b2 (x; θ) = O
ϵ2
ϵ
This completes the proof of Theorem 12.
48

Proof of Proposition 13. As discussed below Proposition 13, the ground-truth gradient g † (θ) is
asymptotically equivalent to the derivative of J (θ) by (36). The rest of the proof follows very
similarly to those of Lemma 6 and Theorem 8. We omit the details for brevity.

B.4

Auxiliary lemmas and their proofs

Lemma 14. Consider a sequence {an }n that satisfies 0 ≤ an ≤ a for some a > 0 and


C
B
A
an+1 ≤ 1 − + 2 an + 2 , ∀n ≥ 0,
n
n
n

(41)

where A, B, C are three constants satisfying A > 1 and B, C ≥ 0. Then for any constant ε > 0, we
have


(1 + ε)C an0
(42)
,
an ≤ max
(A − 1)n n
holds for all n, where n0 is a constant that depends only on A, B and ε.
Proof of Lemma 14. For any fixed ε, let n0 denote ⌈ B(1+ε)
ε(A−1) ⌉ + 1 where ⌈x⌉ represents the smallest
integer that is larger than x. We prove (42) by induction:
1. Base step: For any n ≤ n0 , it directly follows from the condition an ≤ a that an ≤ an0 /n.
The inequality thus holds for any n ≤ n0 .
2. Induction step: Suppose inequality (42) holds for n = k. We aim to show it holds for n = k +1
as well. To ease notation, let M = max{(1 + ε)C/(A − 1), an0 }. Then according to inequality (41),


A
B
C
M
M
≤
1 − + 2 ak + 2 −
.
ak+1 −
k+1
k
k
k
k+1
Applying the induction hypothesis that ak ≤ M/k yields


M
A
B M
C
M
ak+1 −
≤
1− + 2
+ 2−
k+1
k
k
k
k
k+1
M
AM − C
BM
=
−
+ 3
k(k + 1)
k2
k
 2

1 k M
=
− (AM − C)k + BM
k3 k + 1
1
≤
[kM − (AM − C)k + BM ]
k3
1
=
{k[(1 − A)M + C] + BM } .
k3
B(1+ε)
Since M ≥ (1+ε)C
A−1 , we have (1 − A)M + C ≤ −εC ≤ 0. Combining the fact that k > ε(A−1) , we
obtain


M
1 B(1 + ε)
≤
[(1 − A)M + C] + BM
ak+1 −
k+1
k 3 ε(A − 1)


B C(1 + ε)
=
− M ≤ 0,
k3
A−1

where the last inequality follows from the definition of M as well.
Combining the results from both steps completes the proof of Lemma 14.
49

Lemma 15. Assume the Hessian matrix H ∗ in Assumption 7 is a diagonal matrix diag(−λ1 , . . . , −λr ),
where λ1 , · · · , λr are the r positive eigenvalues of −H ∗ . Under Assumption 7, the set Q⊤ Θ∗ =
{Q⊤ θ : θ ∈ Θ∗ } consists of a single point v ∗ .
Proof of Lemma 15. Suppose there are two different points v1 , v2 ∈ Q⊤ Θ∗ with v1 = Q⊤ θ1∗ , v2 =
Q⊤ θ2∗ . Applying Taylor’s expansion leads to,
1
J(θ1∗ ) − J(θ2∗ ) = ∇θ J(θ2∗ ) + (θ2∗ − θ1∗ )⊤ H(θe∗ )(θ2∗ − θ1∗ ),
2

(43)

for some θe∗ lying between θ1∗ and θ2∗ . Since Θ∗ is convex (Assumption 7), we have θe∗ ∈ Θ∗ . Given
that J(θ1∗ ) = J(θ2∗ ) and ∇J(θ2∗ ) = 0, it follows from (43) that
0 = (θ2∗ − θ1∗ )⊤ H(θe∗ )(θ2∗ − θ1∗ ) = (θ2∗ − θ1∗ )⊤ Q̄diag(λ1 , · · · , λr , 0⊤ )Q̄⊤ (θ2∗ − θ1∗ ).
Expanding further, we obtain
0=

r
X

λk (v2k − v1k )2 ,

(44)

k=1

where vik denotes the k-th element of vi . From (44), it is immediate to see that v1 = v2 , confirming
that Q⊤ Θ∗ is a singleton. This completes the proof.
Lemma 16. Consider a function J(θ) defined on a compact parameter set Θ ⊆ Rd . Suppose J(θ)
is twice continuously differentiable, and its gradient vector g(θ) satisfies PL with constant µ (refer
to Assumption 4). Then, for any maximizer θ∗ ∈ Θ of J, every positive eigenvalue of the negative
Hessian matrix −∇θ g(θ∗ ) is no smaller than µ. In particular, under the L-smoothness condition
(Assumption 3), we have µ ≤ L.
Proof of Lemma 16. Let θ∗ ∈ Θ be a maximizer of J(θ), λ be a positive eigenvalue of −∇θ g(θ∗ )
and v be its eigenvector with ∥v∥ = 1. Applying Talyor’s theorem to the function f (t) = J(θ∗ + tv)
at t = 0, we obtain:
1
J(θ∗ + tv) − J(θ∗ ) = tv ⊤ g(θ∗ ) + t2 v ⊤ ∇θ g(θ∗ )v + o(t2 ).
2
Since θ∗ maximizes J(θ), we have g(θ∗ ) = 0. Moreover, since v is an eigenvector with unit ℓ2 -norm,
we have v ⊤ ∇θ g(θ∗ )v = −λ. Therefore,
1
J(θ∗ ) − J(θ∗ + tv) = t2 λ + o(t2 ).
2

(45)

Applying the PL condition to the left hand side, we obtain
1
∥g(θ∗ + tv)∥2
2µ
1
= ∥g(θ∗ + tv) − g(θ∗ )∥2
2µ
t2
= ∥v T ∇θ g(θ∗ )∥2 + o(t2 )
2µ
λ2 t2
=
+ o(t2 ).
2µ

J(θ∗ ) − J(θ∗ + tv) ≤

50

(46)

Combining (45) and (46) yields
λ2 t2
1
≥ λt2 + o(t2 ).
2µ
2
Dividing both sides by t2 and letting t → 0 gives λ2 ≥ µλ. Since λ > 0, it follows that λ ≥ µ.
Therefore, all positive eigenvalues of −∇θ g(θ∗ ) are lower bounded by µ. Using similar arguments,
we can show that the smoothness constant L must also satisfy L ≥ µ.
Lemma 17 (Robins-Siegmund Theorem). Let (Ω, F, (Fn )n≥1 , P ) be a filtered probability space.
For each n ≥ 1, Vn , An , Bn , Cn are four positive Fn -measurable random variable such that
E[Vn+1 |Fn ] ≤ (1 + An )Vn + Bn − Cn .
P∞
P∞
if
n=1 An < ∞ and
n=1 Bn < ∞
Pholds almost surely, then Vn converges to some random
variable V∞ almost surely. Moreover, ∞
n=1 Cn < ∞ almost surely.
Proof of Lemma 17. Refer to Theorem 1 of Robbins and Siegmund [1971].
Lemma 18. Let {∆Mn , Fn , n ≥ 1} is a martingale difference sequence satisfying
n
i
1X h
E (∆Mi )(∆Mi )⊤ |Fi−1 → Λ
n

a.s.,

i=1

where Λ is a symmetric positive semidefinite random matrix and
n

√
1X 
E ∥∆Mi ∥2 I{∆Mi ≥ ε n}|Fi−1 → 0
n

a.s. for ∀ε > 0.

i=1

Let {Hn }n denote a sequence of random matrices satisfying Hn → H almost surely, where H is a
nonrandom matrix with all its eigenvalues larger than 1/2. Then for a sequence of random vectors
∆n that satisfies

Hn 
∆n+1 = I −
∆n + ∆Mn ,
n
√
d
we have n∆n → N (0, Σ) where
Z ∞
1
1
Σ=
(e−(H− 2 I)u )⊤ Λe−(H− 2 I)u du.
0

Proof of Lemma 18. The proof follows immediately from Propositions B.1 and B.2 of Zhang [2016].

C

Experiment Details

This section provides the prompts we used in Section 5.
Prompt template for the In-Context Learning model.

51

Solve the arithmetic problem.

Return ONLY the final integer.

<arithmetic problem >

Prompt template for the Base and Instruct models.
You are a calculator.
final integer.

Solve the arithmetic problem and return ONLY the

Examples:
Problem: 15 + 25 =
Answer: 40
Problem: 20 + 30 - 15 =
Answer: 35
Problem: 3 * 4 =
Answer: 12
Problem: 24 / 6 =
Answer: 4
Problem: 25 - (10 + 5) =
Answer: 10
Now solve:
Problem: <arithmetic problem >

52

Algorithm 2 Group relative policy optimization
1: Input: prompt distribution f (X), initial parameter θ ∈ Θ, learning rates {ηi }i∈N , batch size
B, per-prompt group size G, number of minibatches m, KL regularization parameter κ > 0
and reference model θref .
2: for i = 0, 1, 2, . . . , n − 1 do
3:
Set θold ← θ.
iid
4:
Sample prompts {X (b) }B
b=1 ∼ f (·).
5:
For each prompt X (b) , generate a group of G outputs
(b)
{Y (b,g) }G
g=1 ∼ πθold (· | X ).

6:
7:
8:
9:

For each output Y (b,g) , obtain reward Z (b,g) .
Partition {1, . . . , B} into m disjoint minibatches B1 , . . . , Bm of equal size.
for j = 1, . . . , m do
P
Compute the minibatch gradient estimator gb(θ) = |Bj |−1 b∈Bj gb(X (b) ; θ) where
gb(X

(b)

" (b,g)
#
(b,g)
G
πθref ,t
1 XX
(b,g) πθ,t
(b,g)
; θ) :=
∇θ log πθ,t
A
+ κ (b,g) − κ ,
(b,g)
G
π
πθ,t
g=1 t
θold ,t

where
(b,g)
πθ,t := πθ



(b,g)
(b,g)
Yt
| X (b) , Y<t



(14)

,

and
A(b,g) :=

Z (b,g) − Z̄ (b,−g)
,
se(Z (b,•) )

(15)

where Z (b,•) = {Z (b,g) }G
g=1 and
se(Z

10:

(b,•)

s
)=

1 X (b,g)
[Z
− Z̄ (b) ]2 ,
G−1 g

denotes its standard error and Z̄ (b) denotes the empirical group mean G−1
Update the parameter:
θ ← θ + ηi+1 gb(θ).

end for
12: end for
13: Output: policy πθ .
11:

53

(16)
PG

g=1 Z

(b,g) .

